Kolej MARA Banting (KMB) or MARA College Banting (MCB) is one of the four pre-university colleges operated by MARA. The school is state funded and headed by a Director. It is a top ranked IB world school, scoring above the international average in terms of candidates with 45 IB points, and candidates obtaining higher than 42 IB points.

History
MCB is an International Baccalaureate World School established since October 1990. Its history began in 1985 when the GCE A-Level programme was introduced in MARA Junior Science College Seremban (MRSM Seremban, now known as Kolej MARA Seremban). To diversify the number of universities that students can apply to, in 1991 the college introduced a new pre-university programme, which is the IB Diploma Programme. The IB programme is a preparatory programme recognised for admission into universities around the world. 

To accommodate the growing programmes and students, a new 84 acres campus located in Banting was constructed. On July 1, 1992, the new campus started its operations under the name MRSM Banting with a 71 International Baccalaureate students from MRSM Cheras and 310 GCE A-Level students from MRSM Cheras and MRSM Seremban.

In 1994, the name of the junior college was changed to Kolej MARA Banting (MARA College Banting) to differentiate the college from the other MARA Junior Science Colleges and appropriately reflect the preuniversity student body. The IB diploma depicts the name MARA College Banting in the transcript. The college has 94 lecturers with 41 supporting staff running the day to day activities of the college. Since May 2003, MARA College Banting has become a full fledged 'IB World School'. Previously, MARA College Banting offered other pre-university programmes such as GCE A-Level and Matriculation but now only the IB programme. 

The college campus is located in Bukit Changgang, Selangor, near Kuala Lumpur International Airport and Putrajaya.
Students sit for their IB examination in May. Among the subjects offered at the college are Biology HL, Business and Management SL and HL, Chemistry HL, Economics SL and HL, English A2, B SL and HL, Information Technology in Global Society SL, Malay A1 SL, Mathematics SL and HL, Physics HL, Arts SL, and Theory of Knowledge. Even so, students may request other subjects as well where necessary and because of this, German AB initio SL, Malay A1 HL, and Physics SL have been introduced.

Although students intake is open to the public, (to date only a few alumni are private paying students), students usually gain entry by winning a scholarship - among the organizations offering such scholarships are Majlis Amanah Rakyat (MARA), Jabatan Perkhidmatan Awam (JPA), Yayasan Peneraju, Petronas and Felda.

Mission
The college's mission is to serve as a preparation centre for students to study at top universities especially abroad due to its international focus. Many of the students will pursue their first degree majoring in Accountancy, Engineering, Medicine, Biotechnology, Applied science, Architecture, Law, Economy, or Dentistry. Previously, disciplines such as Business Studies, Geology, Computer Science and Estate Management were also offered to students. 

University placements for the IB graduates have been in the United Kingdom, Ireland, Australia, New Zealand, Czech Republic, Canada, United States of America, India and local universities.

