Transport in Cairo comprises an extensive road network, rail system, subway system and maritime services for the more than 15.2 million inhabitants of the city. Cairo is the hub of almost the entire Egyptian transport network.

 Transport today 


 Road system 

An extensive road network connects Cairo with other Egyptian cities and villages. There is a new ring road that surrounds the outskirts of the city, with exits that reach to almost every Cairo district. There are flyovers, and bridges such as the Sixth of October Bridge, designed to allow fast and efficient means of transport from one side of the city to the other; in practice, however, Cairo traffic is known to be overwhelming and overcrowded, with traffic jams frequently increasing travel time far beyond the theoretical speed.weekly.ahram.org.eg/2006/779/feature.htm

 Bus system 


There is a public bus system that offers several lines of service in different classes and prices. There is the standard bus service, the air-conditioned service, known as CTA short for Cairo Transport Authority (for a higher price) and Mini-buses (smaller buses and more extensive network). Recently most of CTA buses do not have working air-conditioner but they still more comfortable than traditional buses.

Other transport services includes the traditional Cairo Taxi and Micro-buses, both are privately run by individuals. The Micro-buses are the cheapest form of transport in Cairo, yet not very reliable. The traditional Cairo Taxi is also run by individuals and usually operate on older models of cars that are being replaced by the effective Cairo Cab for a more modern look in the city.

Egyptians use cabs, cars, and the Nile ferry as methods of transportation.

Air
The largest airport in Egypt, Cairo International Airport, is located near in the Heliopolis district and is accessible by car, taxi and bus. Line 3 of the Cairo Metro, opened in 2012, is being extended to connect the airport to the city; the extension is expected to be complete by 2019.

Cairo International Airport is the busiest airport in Egypt and the primary hub for Star Alliance member EgyptAir. The airport is located to the north-east of the city around 15 km from the business area of the city. The airport is administered by the Egyptian Holding Company for Airports and Air Navigation (EHCAAN), which controls four companies including: Cairo Airport Co., Egyptian Airports Co., National Air Navigation Services and Aviation Information Technology and the Cairo Airport Authority (CAA), which is the regulatory body. 

Cairo International is the second busiest airport in Africa after Johannesburg International Airport in South Africa. Cairo Airport handles about 3,400 daily flights, more than 12,100 weekly flights and about 125,000 yearly flights. The airport has three terminals with the third (Terminal 3) opening in April 2009 which houses EgyptAir and its Star Alliance partners. There are also three runways (a fourth runway was opened in early 2009) and a single cargo terminal. Runway 05L/23R is 3,300m long, 05R/23L has a length of 4,000m and 16/34 is 3,180m (all of the runways are 60m wide). The fourth runway, south of the existing airfield is 4,000m by 65m and suitable for the Airbus A380.

With the assimilation of EgyptAir into Star Alliance in July 2008 the airport has the potential to be a major hub with its positioning between Africa, the Middle East and Europe (especially with facilities for the A380). 

In 2008, the airport served 14,360,175 passengers (+14.2% vs. 2007) and handled just over 138,000 aircraft movements (+12.4% vs. 2007). According to Airports Council International statistics, of the top 100 airports in the world, CAI reported the highest growth rate of any airport in 2008.

Airport Transfer

Cairo Airport Shuttle Bus cairoshuttlebus.com cairo airport shuttle bus http://cairoshuttlebus.com
Shuttle Bus service, it is comfortable, prompt & direct from or to the airport according to your own preference, the latest fleet of vehicles is vast in terms of space & air-conditioned. For groups or single passenger, the Shuttle Bus takes you to any of the following destinations :

Cairo cab

The introduction of a new organized private taxi service was finally realized in March, 2006. The new "yellow" taxis offer a more reliable, luxurious and advanced taxi service in modern air-conditioned cars (Hyundai Elantra, Volkswagen Parati and the Chevrolet Optra) through the help of three privately run companies operating in Cairo, Giza and Qalyubia. There are stops for the cabs and there is a free number to order a cab. The cab drivers speak English for the millions of tourists. An average cab ride is $3 USD, prices may vary on distance.

In subsequent years, an even newer plan for "white" taxis has been implemented and white taxis now vastly outnumber yellow taxis. The Egyptian government has a popular program giving steep discounts on newer more efficient vehicles to taxi owners in exchange for scrapping decades-old Ladas and other black cabs. White cabs all have air conditioning (you might have to ask them to turn it on during summer) and electronic meters with contemporary pricing, allowing tourists and locals to ride without having to bargain for prices. Meters start at 2.5 LE for the first kilometer and add 1.25 LE per kilometer after that, plus 0.25 LE per minute of waiting time, though a 20km trip to the center could easily become 30km. 

While yellow cabs continue to wait at designated spots, white cabs operate like black cabs, and can be hailed from anywhere in the city. Many white taxis are fueled by compressed natural gas.

The government program is planned to expand to other cities in 2012.

 Cairo Metro 


 Tram 



Constructed near the beginning of the 20th century, the Tram system is still used in modern day Cairo, especially in modern areas, like Heliopolis, Nasr City.


 Train 

Cairo is extensively connected to other Egyptian cities and villages by rail operated by the Egyptian National Railways.
Cairo's main railway station - Ramses Station (Mahattat Ramses) is located on Midan Ramses.

 Nile ferry 

There's a maritime ferry boat system that crosses the Nile River.

