Sadiq Aman Khan (born 8 October 1970) is a British Labour Party politician who has been the Member of Parliament (MP) for Tooting since 2005. In 2008 he was appointed Minister of State for Communities by Prime Minister Gordon Brown, making him the second-ever British Pakistani to serve in the UK Government. He was later the Minister of State for Transport before joining the Shadow Cabinet of Ed Miliband as Shadow Secretary of State for Justice and Shadow Lord Chancellor in 2010. On 16 January 2013 he was also appointed Shadow Minister for London.

Early life
Khan was born in 1970 in London, to a family of Pakistani immigrants. His father worked as a bus driver. He grew up in a council flat on the Henry Prince Estate in Earlsfield, and attended Fircroft Primary and Ernest Bevin Schools, before going to the University of North London to study law.

He was a visiting lecturer at the University of North London, and a former governor of South Thames FE College. Khan served as Vice Chair of the Legal Action Group (LAG). He served as Chair of the civil liberties pressure group Liberty (NCCL) for three years.

He has been married since 1994 and has two daughters. Khan is also a keen follower of sport and a supporter of both Liverpool FC and Surrey County Cricket Club.

Legal career

Before entering parliament in 2005, Khan was a human rights solicitor.

He completed the Law Society finals at the College of Law in Guildford. From 1994 to 1997, he was employed as a trainee solicitor and assistant solicitor at the firm of Christian Fisher. From 1997 to 2005, he served as a partner in the firm Christian Khan with Louise Christian.

During his legal career specialised in actions against the police, employment and discrimination law, judicial reviews, inquests and crime, and was involved in a number of landmark cases including the following:
*Bubbins vs The United Kingdom (European Court of Human Rights - shooting of an unarmed individual by police marksmen)
*HSU and Thompson v Met Police (wrongful arrest/police damages)
*Reeves v Met Police (duty of care to prisoners)
*Murray v CAB (discrimination)
*Ahmed v University of Oxford (racial discrimination against a student)
*Dr Jadhav v Secretary of State for Health (racial discrimination in the employment of Indian doctors by the health service)
*CI Logan v Met Police (racial discrimination)
*Supt Dizaei v Met Police (police damages, discrimination)
*Inquest into the death of David Rocky Bennett (use of restraints)
*Lead solicitor on Mayday demonstration 2001 test case litigation (Human Right Act)
*Farakhan v Home Secretary (Human Rights Act)
*In February 2000, Khan represented a group of Kurdish actors who were arrested by Metropolitan Police during a rehearsal of the Harold Pinter play 'Mountain Language', securing £150,000 in damages for the group for wrongful arrest and the trauma caused by their arrest.
*Mcdowell and Taylor v Met Police: Leroy McDowell and his friend Wayne Taylor, who both suffer from the blood disorder sickle cell anaemia, successfully sued the Metropolitan Police for assault and false imprisonment.

Political career
Councillor
Khan was a Councillor in the London Borough of Wandsworth from 1994 to 2006, representing Tooting. He was made an Honorary Alderman of Wandsworth upon his retirement.

Member of Parliament
In 2003, Tooting Constituency Labour Party decided to open its parliamentary selection to all interested candidates, including the incumbent MP since 1974, Tom Cox. This prompted Cox, then in his mid-70s, to announce his retirement rather than risk de-selection. In the subsequent selection contest, Khan beat five other local candidates to become Labour's candidate for the seat. He was subsequently elected to Parliament in 2005.

Khan was awarded the "Newcomer of the Year Award" at the 2005 Spectator Parliamentarian of the Year Awards "for the tough-mindedness and clarity with which he has spoken about the very difficult issues of Islamic terror". In August 2006, he was a signatory of an open letter to Tony Blair criticising the UK's foreign policy.

On 3 February 2008, The Sunday Times claimed that a conversation between Khan and prisoner Babar Ahmad - a friend and constituent - at Woodhill Prison in Milton Keynes had been bugged by the Metropolitan Police Anti-Terrorist Branch. An inquiry was launched by Justice Secretary Jack Straw. There was some concern that the bugging contravened the Wilson Doctrine that police should not bug MPs. The report concluded that the Doctrine did not apply because it was ordered by a police officer and not an MP.

In 2010, Khan was re-elected as the MP for Tooting despite a swing against him of 3.6% and a halving of his previous majority. In the subsequent Labour leadership election Khan was an early backer of Ed Miliband, and was later appointed his campaign manager. Khan masterminded Miliband's shock win over his older brother David, and was tipped as a future rising star of the Labour Party, jumping 82 places in one year to 16th in The Daily Telegraph's 'top 100 most influential left-wingers' poll.

Government
Following Prime Minister Gordon Brown's Cabinet reshuffle of 3 October 2008, Khan was appointed Minister of State for Communities, replacing Parmjit Dhanda, and becoming only the second Muslim ever to serve in the UK Government. In the House of Commons in January 2009, Khan criticised the Pope for the rehabilitation of Bishop Richard Williamson following his remarks about the Holocaust, a move he described as "highly unsavoury" and of "great concern".

In 2009, he became the first Muslim to ever attend a meeting of the Cabinet upon his appointment as Minister of State for Transport. In what was believed to be a first for an MP, Khan used his Twitter account to announce his promotion to Transport Minister.

In March 2010, he publicly stated that for the second year in a row he would not be taking a pay rise as MP or Minister, saying "At a time when many people in Tooting and throughout the country are having to accept pay freezes I don't think it's appropriate for MPs to accept a pay rise." For the first fifteen months he served in the Government, he did not take any ministerial salary.

Shadow Cabinet
In the wake of Labour's 2010 election defeat, acting leader Harriet Harman promoted Khan to the Shadow Cabinet as Shadow Secretary of State for Transport. After running Ed Miliband's successful leadership campaign, Khan was rewarded with the senior roles of Shadow Lord Chancellor and Shadow Secretary of State for Justice. He was made the Shadow Minister for London, in addition to his other roles, in 2013.

He is regularly named as one of the top 100 most influential London politicians in the Evening Standard's annual poll of the most influential 1000 Londoners and is an ambassador for Mosaic, an initiative set up by Prince Charles.

Potential London Mayor Candidate
In 2013, Sadiq Khan appeared on a number of speaker platforms and in the press discussing the London 2016 Mayoral election, and was quoted in the Evening Standard saying he would consider running for Mayor.

Expenses re-payments
In April 2010 it was revealed that Khan had repaid wrongly claimed expenses on two further occasions. The first incident concerned letters sent out before the General Election which were ruled to have the 'unintentional effect of promoting his return to office', the second a £2,550 repayment for Christmas, Eid, and birthday cards for constituents. Under Commons rules, pre-paid envelopes and official stationery can only be used for official parliamentary business. Khan's claim for the birthday cards was initially rejected, but he presented a new invoice no longer identifying the nature of the claim, and this was accepted. Khan apologised for breaking the expenses rules.

Khan had previously had to repay £500 in expenses in 2007 in relation to a newsletter sent out constituents featuring a 'Labour rose', which was deemed to be unduly prominent. While the content of the newsletter was not deemed to be party political, the rose logo was found to be unduly prominent which may have had the effect of promoting a political party. The rules were retrospectively changed disallowing the claim, which had previously been approved by the House of Commons Authorities. There was no suggestion that Khan had deliberately or dishonestly compiled his expenses claims and the only claim to the contrary came from his opponent at the general election in 2010.

London Marathon Tweet
In March 2014 Khan apologised after posting an image on Twitter of a London Marathon sponsorship note sent to him from former Labour leader Lord Kinnock, which joked about the death of Conservative MP Eric Pickles by stating that 'get Pickles to go with you so we have a helpful by-election...' Pickles accepted the apology and stated that 'so far as I am concerned the matter is closed'.

Personal life
Khan is a governor of Fircroft School and of Gatton School, both are in Tooting.

He has also served as Chair of the Fabian Society, and remains on its Executive Committee. In 2009 he won the prestigious Jenny Jeger award for best Fabian pamphlet, for his publication 'Fairness not Favours: How to re-connect with British Muslims'. He also edited the Fabian essay collection 'Our London: the capital beyond 2015'.

In 2013 he received death threats over his vote in favour of the gay marriage bill.

