Intu Victoria Centre, is a shopping centre in Nottingham, England, constructed between 1967 and 1972.

The Victoria Centre has various fashion and high street stores as well as cafes, restaurants, a health and fitness centre and the Nottingham Victoria bus station. Over three million people live within a 45 minute drive of the centre.

History
The Victoria Centre stands on the site of the old Nottingham Victoria railway station, which was demolished in 1967. The clock tower and the former Victoria Station Hotel (now run by Hilton Hotels) are the only parts of the old station to survive.
The shopping centre was built between 1967 and 1972 by Taylor Woodrow. Above the shopping centre rise the 26 floor, 256 feet (72m) high "Victoria Centre Flats", which run North to South along the length. There are 464 flats and of offices.

In 1973, the sculptor Roland Emmett was commissioned to design and build a water powered clock, known as The Aqua Horological Tintinnabulator. Until a refurbishment in the 1990s, the clock chimed the quarter hour by playing an excerpt from the fourth movement, 'Gigue en Rondeau II', of Rameau's (1683–1764), 'Pieces de Clavecin' Suite in E-minor. This musical sculpture is by Boots, Next and John Lewis and is a popular meeting place.

In 1997 the centre was extended to give more retail space and the addition of new anchor, House of Fraser. Following this the rest of the centre was refurbished.

In 2010 it was announced that the Victoria Centre would be expanded to compete with Westfield's nearby Broadmarsh Centre and new centres in Derby and Leicester. In November 2011, Capital Shopping Centres purchased the Broadmarsh Centre. The purchase prompted an investigation by the Office of Fair Trading and the Competition Commission, who were concerned the company's monopoly over the city's shopping centres could negatively impact competition. Following the purchase, the owners wished to start the planned development of the Victoria Centre; however, Nottingham City Council have insisted Broadmarsh must be their "priority", and they offered £50 million towards its redevelopment. The deputy leader of Nottingham City Council said the council would withhold planning permission for the development of the Victoria Centre until they "see bulldozers going into the Broadmarsh Centre".

In February 2013 the parent company, Capital Shopping Centres, changed its name to "Intu Properties plc". The centre was rebranded "Intu Victoria Centre" as part of the company's £25m nationwide re-brand.

In 2013 plans were revealed for the centre to be refurbished. The refurbishment started in February 2014 and is due for completion in Summer 2015. The refurbishment is being undertaken by Laing O'Rourke and features new lighting, flooring and new entrances along with new toilet facilities. This is the second refurbishment that has been undertaken in the centre since the last major refurbishment in 1997. There are also plans for an extension to be added to the centre to increase floor space but this wont be considered until the plans for Intu Broadmarsh have been submitted. The famous Emett Clock is being removed and refurbished during the works and will be reinstalled in a different location in the centre before the refurbishment is completed in Summer 2015. 

Victoria Centre Market
On the first floor, opposite John Lewis, is Nottingham's largest indoor market, the Victoria Centre Market. It sells a range of goods including fresh food, meat and fish. There are also speciality stalls selling items such as books, jewellery and haberdashery. The market is open from Monday to Saturday from 9:00 - 5:00pm. 

In 2008 it won the award for the "Greenest Market in the Midlands" from the National Market Traders Federation.

