Robert Anderson "Rob" Huebel (born June 4, 1969) is an American actor, comedian and writer best known for his sketch comedy work on the MTV series Human Giant. He currently co-stars on the Adult Swim series Childrens Hospital.

Early life
Huebel was born in Alexandria, Virginia, the son of Louisa and Jared Huebel. He attended Annandale High School in Annandale, Virginia before attending Clemson University in South Carolina where he studied Marketing in hopes of working in advertising. He later moved to New York and began studying improv comedy at the Upright Citizens Brigade Theater.

Career
He first began improvising when he was 27 by taking classes at the Upright Citizens Brigade Theatre in New York.

Huebel's early work was as a sketch actor on shows such as Late Night with Conan O'Brien and Upright Citizens Brigade. He was nominated for an Emmy award for his work as a producer for Michael Moore's Bravo series The Awful Truth and also worked as a segment producer on The Daily Show with Jon Stewart .

Huebel was a panelist on the VH1 series Best Week Ever, part of the NetZero "Candidate Zero" campaign during the 2004 election, and known for the "Inconsiderate Cell Phone Man" character, shown at movie theatres before showtime. He also appeared on the HBO television series Curb Your Enthusiasm as well as Fox's Arrested Development. He is the comedy partner of Rob Riggle, a comedian he worked with in the improvisational comedy troupe Respecto Montalban and at the Upright Citizens Brigade. Huebel and Riggle performed a comedy bit in the documentary Super High Me. Among their best known work at UCB, included their long-running two-man show "Kung-Fu Grip", which was eventually showcased at the 2004 HBO Comedy Arts Festival. He was in the movie Blackballed: The Bobby Dukes Story as Sam Brown with Corddry, Scheer, and Riggle.

Huebel and fellow comedians Aziz Ansari and Paul Scheer are writers, actors, and executive producers in the MTV sketch comedy show Human Giant. Some of Huebel's characters from the show include Samir from "The Shutterbugs" and T.C. Everwood from "Clell Tickle." He guest starred in the 30 Rock episode "MILF Island", and also as Holly's boyfriend A.J. in three episodes of The Office. He played the role of 'Tevin' in the 2009 comedy I Love You, Man. He currently co-stars with Rob Corddry in Childrens Hospital, currently airing new episodes on Adult Swim.

Huebel continues to regularly perform at the Upright Citizens Brigade Theatre in Los Angeles. He currently co-hosts the live sketch show "Crash Test" with Paul Scheer twice a month, as well as hosting "The Shit Show", in which he gathers comedian friends and other well-known performers to present the worst scenes in films, television and commercials that they have ever done.

Huebel has written and starred in various filmed sketches for the HBO sketch comedy program Funny or Die Presents. In November 2010, Huebel performed stand-up on The Benson Interruption on Comedy Central.

Huebel most recently appeared in the films The Other Guys, Life as We Know It, Little Fockers, Despicable Me, and The Descendants.

In February 2011, Huebel was cast as a lead in the FOX sitcom pilot Family Album and in May he guest starred on ABC's sitcom, Modern Family as Glen Whipple in the episode "The One That Got Away". He also appeared as a semi-regular castmember on Amazon Studios' Transparent, playing Len Novak.

Huebel appears frequently on the comedy podcast Comedy Bang Bang along with starring in his own podcast series on the Earwolf network, Mike Detective.

He appeared in Horrible Bosses 2, and will next co-star in The Interview and Barely Lethal.

