Eric David Fingerhut is the President and CEO of Hillel: The Foundation for Jewish Campus Life. Prior he served as the corporate Vice President of Education and STEM Learning business at Battelle Memorial Institute, Chancellor of the Ohio Board of a Regents and Ohio Senator.

Fingerhut was appointed Chancellor of the Ohio Board of Regents on March 14, 2007 by Governor Ted Strickland. This position is a member of the Ohio Governor's Cabinet. On February 22, 2011, he submitted his resignation to Gov. John Kasich, effective March 14, 2011, after serving four years of his five-year term. Chancellor Fingerhut earned a reputation as an innovative leader and ardent advocate of the value of higher education. He left with high praise from the Ohio’s newspapers. An editorial in the Columbus Dispatch declared, “Eric Fingerhut’s diplomacy, energy, pragmatism and knowhow will be missed.”

 Family life 
Eric Fingerhut is married to Amy Fingerhut and has two sons, Sam and Charlie. His parents are Samuel and Alice Fingerhut.
He has been an active member in the Jewish community serving as a teacher and President of his synagogue.

 Early work and education 
Fingerhut earned a Bachelor of Science degree from Northwestern University in 1981 and a law degree from Stanford University in 1984. He practiced law at Hahn Loeser & Parks LLP in Cleveland until becoming associate director of Cleveland Works, where he served in from 1987 to 1989. Fingerhut served as the campaign manager for then candidate for Cleveland Mayor Michael R. White and then became the director of his transition team.

 Politics 
Fingerhut served as an Ohio state senator from 1991 to 1993. In 1992, he was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives from Ohio's 19th congressional district and began serving in 1993 (103rd Congress). In his re-election bid in 1994, however, Fingerhut was defeated by Lake County Prosecutor Steve LaTourette. After his defeat in Congress, Fingerhut easily won a seat again in the Ohio Senate, representing district 25. He served two full terms from 1999 through 2007, retiring due to term limits.

 Support for Israel 
While representing Ohio’s 19th district in the 103rd Congress, Eric was the co-sponsor of four bills in support of Israel. Including:

•	H.R. 1407 confronted a boycott of the State of Israel by aiming “To prohibit government-to-government and commercial arms sales to any country that is participating in or cooperating with the boycott of Israel by Arab countries.” 

•	H.R. 3646 unequivocally voiced its support for Israel seeking to “restrict sales and leases of defense articles and defense services to any country or international organization which as a matter of policy or practice is known to have sent letters to United States firms requesting compliance with, or soliciting information regarding compliance with, the secondary or tertiary Arab boycott.”

 Tenure at Hillel International 
Very quickly after beginning his tenure as CEO of Hillel International, the organization experienced a major controversy. The Hillel chapter at Swarthmore College declared itself an "Open Hillel," choosing to welcome all guest speakers and student organizations, whether or not they support Zionism. Fingerhut responded, stating "Let me be very clear – “anti-Zionists” will not be permitted to speak using the Hillel name or under the Hillel roof, under any circumstances." This controversy is widely seen as a key part of a broad conversation in the American Jewish community regarding whether or not Zionism is, or should be, a consensus issue.

