Patricio Escobar (March 17, 1843 – April 19, 1912) was the President of Paraguay between November 25, 1886 and November 25, 1890.

His life

He was born in San José de los Arroyos on March 17, 1843. His parents were José Escobar and Ana Bella Cáceres. He was married first with Ignacia Garcete and later with Estalación E. The General Escobar was a hero in War of Paraguay against the Triple Alliance.

He was a private in the base of arms in Cerro León, later he joined the Battalion of Infantry No. 36. He was promoted to first officer in May 1866 and second lieutenant after the battle in Curupayty. He was adjutant of Marshal López in 1867 in the Headquarters of Paso Pucú. He became Coronel in Cerro Corá. He was assigned difficult missions because he was a calm and cautious man.

His body reflected what the situation in battle was like since he was covered in scars that gave testimony of his heroic acts. He was prisoner by the enemies, but after being freed he went back immediately to the army. During his government, Salvador Jovellanos promoted Escobar to Brigadier General on July 16, 1874 and Juan B. Gill promoted him to Major General, on July 6, 1876. When he retired from military duty he shut away in his home, where he died on April 19, 1912.

His government

He assumed the presidency on November 25, 1886. General Escobar started his government with three military men and two civilians. His Vice-President was José del Rosario Miranda and his cabinet was formed by Agustín Cañete, Higinio Uriarte and José Tomás Sosa in Treasury; Juan Antonio Meza and Manuel A. Maciel in the Department of Interior, Manuel A. Maciel and César Gondra in the Justice Department; Pedro Duarte in War and Navy; and Benjamín Aceval, José Segundo Decoud, juan Crisóstomo Centurión and José Tomás Sosa in the State Department.

During his government were founded the Democratic Center and the Republican National Association, after that was founded the Liberal Party (Blue) and the Colorado Party (Red). On October 24, 1887 was created the National Council of Education. Was enacted the law of obligatory primary education, the Paraguayan teacher Atanasio Riera, graduated in Corrientes and writer of “Primera memoria sobre Educación común” (First memories about Common Education), returned to the country. That same year the treaty Aceval-Tamayo, with Bolivia was signed, the Agricultural Bank and the Official Newspaper were created.

On July 20, 1888 the Law School was re-opened and on September 11 died the professor, writer and Argentine ex-president Domingo Faustino Sarmiento, who collaborated in the creation of new educative plans. In 1890 Adela and Celsa Speratti return to the country after their exile and organized the School of Teachers.

General Escobar gave special importance to the development of education as a sign of progress for the country. On September 24, 1889 the National University was founded and two years before the National Library, Paraguay participated in the First International American Conference, organized in Washington and was created the Bank of Paraguay. The law that established the purposes and conditions of the secondary teaching was approved and public schools were created in Villa Rica, Encarnación, Pilar and Concepción. The rail tracks were extended from Paraguarí to Villa Rica, hiring the Company Patri, Travassos and Cía. for the purpose, later the work was given to an English company. The electric power was also installed in the country for the first time.

Bravery in Ype-Cuá

During the war, in the middle of December, 1868, the hopes of escape for the Paraguayan troops were seemed impossible because they did not know the resources of the enemy and did not have the necessary information. Since he could not feel helpless, Patricio crossed swimming the Ype-Cuá brook. He crossed the 35 kilometers risking being bitten by snakes and other animals that used to live in the water. He was a true patriot, and in spite of being tired and having a wound in the chest he managed to collect the necessary information.

“The hero of Ype-Cuá”. General Patricio Escobar should have been distinguished with this appropriate denomination and go into history because of his heroic doings and his great courage. But this did not happen. He did not get many recognitions and honors. Just some authors gave him enough credit and tell about his heroic deeds.





