Imotski is a small town situated on the northern side of Biokovo massif, Dalmatian Hinterland, Croatia. As of 2001, the town population is 4,347 and the total municipal population is 10,213. Imotski has a very mild and pleasant climate with many sunny days.

Geography

The town is located close to the border with Bosnia-Herzegovina, by the towns of Posušje and Grude. The nearest coastal town is Makarska.

Imotski is known for its medieval fortress on the rocks of Blue Lake. Another phenomenon is the Red Lake which looks like an eye in the scenery. Both lakes are said to be connected with underground channels to the Adriatic Sea.

History

The town was first mentioned as Imotski in the 10th century. It was held by the Turks from the fall of Bosnia in 1492 until 1717 when it was captured by the Venetians.

Unlike other towns in the area, Imotski had an educational system which consisted of primary and secondary schools from as early as the beginning of the 20th century. The secondary school was founded in 1912 when Imotski was part of the Kingdom of Dalmatia within the Austro-Hungarian empire.

From 1941 to 1945 Imotski was part of the Independent State of Croatia. In April 1944, German forces shot down three American B-24s. The local population saved as many of the American personnel as they could. In 2008, the city decided to raise a memorial to the deceased airmen, one of whom happened to have been a Croatian American with immediate Imotski ancestry.

 Climate 
The climate is Mediterranean, with the highest air temperature averaging during July and the lowest averaging , in January. Summers are usually very hot during the day.

Temperatures above last for more than 240 days a year.

Two kinds of wind are common in the area - the northern to north-eastern bura which usually brings cold and clear weather in winter, and the southern to south-eastern jugo (jug=south) which often brings rain.

 Notable people 
One of the settlement's most famous sons is Zvonimir Boban, the captain of the Croatian national football team, which finished third at the 1998 FIFA World Cup. Žarko Domljan, the first Speaker of the Croatian Parliament, was born in Imotski. The famous poet Tin Ujević spent part of his childhood in Imotski. The city itself is home to Croatian league football club NK Imotski.

There are other individuals born in Imotski to have made their names known outside of the local region. In the world of entertainment, there is the singer Neda Ukraden and film director Antun Vrdoljak. Sports stars include female tennis player Silvija Talaja and footballers Tomislav Bušić and Ivan Gudelj. The father of former Canada national men's ice hockey team captain Joe Sakic, Marijan Šakić, is from Imotski. The famous boxer Mate Parlov was born near Imotski in the village of Ričice, and a famous fighter for Croatian independence Zvonko Bušić is also from Imotski. Dinko Šakić officer in NDH was born in Imotski, and Veljko Kadijević, Minister of Defence in the Yugoslav government from 1988 to 1992, was born in Glavina Donja, near Imotski, but now lives in Moscow, Russia.

