Lake Wallenpaupack is a freshwater lake in Pennsylvania. It is the third largest lake in Pennsylvania measuring 52 miles of shoreline, 13 miles in length, 60 feet deep at points, and has in excess of 5,700 acres of surface water. It was created in 1926 by PPL, the Pennsylvania Power & Light Company, for hydroelectric purposes as well as flood control; however, it is best known as one of several major recreational destinations in the Pocono Mountains. It is located near the city of Hawley, and includes the counties of Pike and Wayne located in northeastern Pennsylvania.

 History 
The Lenape Indians named the area "Wallenpaupack" which means "The Stream of Swift and Slow Water." William Penn later owned the land and then deeded it to his son, who then gave it to James Wilson, one of the signers of the Declaration of Independence.

The lake was planned as a drinking water reservoir, though it was never actually used for this purpose. In order to create the lake, a dam was constructed on Wallenpaupack Creek at Wilsonville. The land of Wilsonville and the surrounding area in the valley was purchased by PPL from about 100 owners at about $20 an acre and most of the property was razed or moved. Some houses remained, and as the valley was flooded the water was so clear that one could see the houses under the water. In all, of roads and utility poles were rerouted, and Purdytown cemetery had to be relocated. The former town of Wilsonville now lies under the water near the dam.

 Recreation 

An integral part of the Lake Region of the Pocono Mountains, Lake Wallenpaupack is both a regional, as well as local, recreation attraction in the tri-state area (Pennsylvania, New Jersey and New York), and is popular with seasonal visitors from the New York City and Philadelphia areas, particularly in the summertime. The lake provides boating, swimming, and fishing access in the summer, as well as ice skating and ice fishing in the winter. Its wooded shoreline also provides opportunities for hiking and viewing wildlife. Lake fish include smallmouth bass, largemouth bass, rock bass, bluegill, walleye, muskellunge, northern pike, pickerel, rainbow trout, brown trout, lake trout, catfish and yellow perch. Striped bass and hybrid striped bass have been stocked in the lake. The lake is long, has of shoreline, and is about deep at its maximum depth.

Ecology

Lake Wallenpaupack faces a number of environmental problems, including water-quality issues from heavy boat usage, algal blooms and rapid sedimentation related to agricultural runoff, and an invasion of purple loosestrife along the shores. The lake is used as an educational resource to teach ecology to students of the Wallenpaupack Area School District, in a curriculum that has been described as innovative.

Popular culture

* Lake Wallenpaupack was featured as a retreat location in the popular TV show The Office in the eleventh episode of the second season, Booze Cruise.
* The lake is the setting of the book Baked Beans for Breakfast (1970) by Ruth Chew.
*The lake is also featured in Oprah's Autobiography, "Somehow I Manage".

