Demián Bichir Nájera is a Mexican actor, is from a well-known family of Mexican actors, the Bichir family, who are of Lebanese Maronite Christian descent, which include his parents Alejandro Bichir and Maricruz Nájera and his brothers Odiseo Bichir and Bruno Bichir. He began his acting career starring in many Mexican telenovelas and films before achieving fame for his roles in Mexican films such as the record-breaking Sexo, pudor y lágrimas and Sin noticias de Dios. In the U.S., he is best known for his role as Detective Marco Ruiz in the FX drama television series The Bridge.

 Early life 
Bichir was born at Torreon, Mexico, the son of actors Alejandro Bichir (Alejandro Bichir Batres) and Maricruz Nájera (María de la Cruz Nájera Botello). He began his acting career at the age of 14 in the telenovela Rina with Ofelia Medina. His second acting role was as an adult in Vivir enamorada – both telenovelas were during his years with Televisa. The following year he obtained a role in his first movie, the American production Choices of the Heart. He got his first starring character in the Telenovela El Rincon de los Prodigios where he acts as a stranger who performs miracles in front of the people confronting the corrupt authorities and the church.

 Career 
Bichir then continued his acting roles in telenovelas with film productions of Mexico, Spain and the United States. After a long retirement of the Mexican telenovelas in favor of a movie career, he went back to TV Azteca in the telenovela Nada Personal where he played the role of an honest detective trying to tackle corruption and drug problems in Mexico. His performance led him to act as the same detective in Con Toda El Alma.

 Mexican movie breakout 
His movie Sexo, pudor y lágrimas (1999) broke box-office records in Mexico becoming the #1 movie in the history of Mexican cinema. He performed one of the main characters and brought him sufficient praise to earn him the Ariel. This movie brought a lot of attention to him and to his brothers. They acted in so many movies that in the MTV Movie Awards-México a special category was created: "Mejor Bichir en una Película" ("Best Bichir in a movie"). He earned this award for the 2003 film Bendito infierno (Holy Hell or Don't Tempt Me), in which he co-starred with Victoria Abril, Penélope Cruz, and Gael García Bernal.

 United States 
His American debut occurred in the film In the Time of the Butterflies (2001) starring Salma Hayek, based on the real life of a group of sisters that fought against the government of a Dominican dictator. Later he got some recognition when he depicted Fidel Castro in Steven Soderbergh's biopic Che (2008) on the life of Argentine revolutionary Che Guevara.

He was exposed to a wider American audience with his recurring role as Esteban Reyes, the corrupt mayor of Tijuana and love interest of Nancy Botwin from Season 4 to Season 7 of the Showtime series Weeds.

Bichir found mainstream U.S. work following his critically acclaimed performance as Carlos Galindo in the 2011 drama A Better Life, which garnered him nominations for the Independent Spirit Award, Screen Actors Guild Award and the Academy Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role. His success would continue to expose him to a wider range of American audiences with roles in various films such as Savages, The Heat, and Machete Kills. In 2013, he began starring in the FX drama television series The Bridge as Detective Marco Ruiz.

On 24 January 2012, he was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role for his performance in A Better Life, where Bichir plays Carlos Galindo, an undocumented Mexican gardener who goes with his son to find his stolen vehicle while trying to convince his son to avoid becoming a delinquent. His nomination came as a shock to both Mexican and American audiences alike since he had only been nominated for a Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Leading Role beforehand. He is the first male Mexican actor to receive this nomination since Anthony Quinn. Though Bichir failed to win the award, he followed it up with roles in the major American releases Savages, The Heat, and Machete Kills.

Bichir recently completed his directorial debut, a movie called Refugio.

 Political activism 
Bichir is an ACLU Ambassador for Immigration Rights.

Bichir believes strongly that Latinos in Hollywood need to claim their place, and not get pigeonholed.

 Personal life 
When Bichir was 22, he moved to New York City with his ex-girlfriend in order to get into the Lee Strasberg Theatre and Film Institute. Then for a brief period he decided not to act and started working at the Rosa Mexicano Restaurant in NYC while learning English. Later, he moved to Los Angeles but had no success landing any acting roles, ultimately deciding to go back to his native Mexico where he found great success.

Bichir was married once, to Mexican singer Lisset Gutiérrez whom he divorced in 2003. He has since stated that it is hard for him "to stay in a long-term relationship." He had a short-lived relationship which led to the birth of his daughter, Gala, in May 2011 in Spain. He remains involved in the child's life.

Demian holds dual Mexican and American citizenship. After coming to the U.S. on a tourist visa, he "eventually became a permanent resident and later on an American citizen, like 3 million other undocumented workers, after Congress passed and President Ronald Reagan signed the Immigration Reform Control Act of 1986." Demian resides in Los Angeles and Mexico City.

 Filmography 
 Television Year Title Role Notes 1977 Rina Juanito 1982 Vivir enamorada NachoProtagonist 1983 Cuando los hijos se van RicardoProtagonist 1984 Los años felices TomasProtagonist 1988 El rincón de los prodigios MonchitoProtagonist 1996 Nada personal Comandante Alfonso Carbajal 2005 La otra mitad del sol Felipe Saenz 2008 Weeds Tijuana mayor and drug kingpin Esteban Reyes 2013 The Bridge Det. Marco Ruiz 

 Film Year Title Role Notes 1983 Choices of the Heart Armando 1986 Astucia 1987 Hotel Colonial Young Hotel Clerk1988 Carmen Vampira The Penitent Roberto 1989 Rojo amanecer Jorge1992 Marea suave Aladdin Aladdin (singing voice – Spanish dub)1993 Miroslava Ricardo La vida conyugal Gaspar Nominated – Ariel Award for Best Actor1994 Ya la hicimos Pruebas de amor Hasta morir Mauricio Ariel Award for Best Actor1995 Cilantro y perejil Carlos Rodríguez Nominated – Ariel Award for Best Actor Nadie hablará de nosotras cuando hayamos muerto Omar1996 Solo Rio Salón México Insp. Casteléon 1997 Perdita Durango Catalina1998 Demasiado corazón Luces de la noche Nominated – Ariel Award for Best Supporting Actor1999 Santitos Cacomixtle Ave Maria Daniel Todo el poder Gabriel Sexo, pudor y lágrimas Tomás Nominated – Ariel Award for Best Actor2000 El silencio del tiempo La toma de la embajada Rosemberg Pabón, 'Comandante Uno'2001 Sin noticias de Dios Manny MTV Movie Award for Best Bichir in a Film In the Time of the Butterflies Manuel 'Manolo' Tavárez Justo2002 Ciudades oscuras ("Dark Cities") Mario Nominated – MTV Movie Award for Best Bichir in a Film Heartbreak Hospital Tonio 2004 Zapata: Amor en Rebeldía Emiliano Zapata (miniseries) Noche en Lima Hipnos Miguel2007 Fuera del cielo American Visa 2008 Che Fidel Castro2010 Hidalgo: La historia jamás contada Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla Nominated – Ariel Award for Best Actor2011 A Better Life Carlos Galindo Nominated – Academy Award for Best ActorNominated – Independent Spirit Award for Best Male LeadNominated – ALMA Award for Favourite Male ActorNominated – Black Reel Award for Best ActorNominated – Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Leading RoleNominated – MTV Movie Award for Best Latino Performance The Runway 2012 Savages Alex Nominated – ALMA Award for Favorite Movie Actor: Supporting Role El Santos vs. La Tetona Mendoza Cerdo Gutiérrez (voice)2013 The Heat Hale Machete KillsMendez the Madman Dom HemingwayMr. Fontaine2014 Death in Buenos Aires Inspector Chávez2015 The Hateful Eight Bob, "The Mexican"

 Accolades Award CategoryTitle of work Result

Academy AwardsBest ActorA Better LifeALMA AwardsFavorite Movie ActorA Better LifeIndependent Spirit AwardsBest Male LeadA Better LifeScreen Actors Guild AwardsOutstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Leading RoleA Better Life

