Sean Charles O'Keefe (born January 27, 1956) is an American businessman and the current chairman and CEO of Airbus Group, Inc., formerly EADS North America, a subsidiary of the European aerospace firm EADS, a former Administrator of NASA, and former chancellor of Louisiana State University (LSU). He is a former member of the board of directors of DuPont. O'Keefe resigned from LSU on January 16, 2008.

O'Keefe and his teenaged son were among four survivors of the 2010 de Havilland Canada DHC-3 Otter crash near Aleknagik, Alaska. 

Early life and education
O'Keefe was born in Monterey, California, to Patricia (née Carlin; died 2010) and Patrick Gordon O'Keefe (born c. 1927), both natives of New Orleans. Patrick O'Keefe became a United States Navy engineer and over the years worked on nuclear submarines. The O'Keefes lived on several naval bases during O'Keefe's childhood. 

In 1973, he graduated from Wheeler High School in North Stonington, Connecticut. He attended Loyola University New Orleans, graduating with his Bachelor of Arts in 1977. He subsequently acquired his Master of Public Administration degree in 1978 from the Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs at Syracuse University. 

Career
After receiving his master's, he began his career as a budget analyst for the Department of Defense. He served on the United States Senate Committee on Appropriations staff for eight years, and was Staff Director of the Defense Appropriations Subcommittee. O'Keefe became Controller and Chief Financial Officer of the Department of Defense in 1989. O'Keefe served as acting United States Secretary of the Navy from July 1992 to January 1993 under President George H. W. Bush.

After Bush left office, O'Keefe was Professor of Business Administration and Assistant to the Senior Vice President for Research and Dean of the Graduate School at Pennsylvania State University. He next became the Louis A. Bantle Professor of Business and Government Policy, an endowed chair at the Syracuse University's Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs. Professor of Business Administration and Assistant to the Senior Vice President for Research and Dean of the Graduate School at Pennsylvania State University.

Joining the George W. Bush administration, O'Keefe served as Deputy Director of the Office of Management and Budget from January to December 2001, a job that strengthened his reputation as a "bean counter" — someone who counts every penny.

Administrator of NASA, 2001-2004
O'Keefe became NASA administrator on December 21, 2001 after his nomination by President George W. Bush was confirmed by the U.S. Senate. O'Keefe came to NASA with a background as a former Secretary of the Navy and Director of OMB, having had no formal training in science or engineering (as was the case with James E. Webb who NASA administrator from 1961 to 1968). O'Keefe's tenure at NASA can be divided into roughly three equal periods, each marked by a single problem or event of overriding importance:
*December 2001 through January 2003: O'Keefe eliminated a $5 billion cost overrun in the construction of the International Space Station.
*February 2003 through December 2003: Space Shuttle Columbia accident and its aftermath.
*January 2004 through February 2005: O'Keefe re-organized NASA to start working on President George W. Bush's newly announced plan to send humans to the Moon and Mars.

One of O'Keefe's most controversial decisions occurred in January 2004, when he cancelled an upcoming mission by the space shuttle to service the aging Hubble Space Telescope. 

O'Keefe claimed that, in light of the Space Shuttle Columbia accident, the mission would be too risky, especially since if the shuttle was damaged while visiting the Hubble, the shuttle would not have enough fuel to dock with the space station as a "safe haven". While supported by members of the Columbia Accident Investigation Board (CAIB) this decision was assailed by numerous astronomers, who felt that the Hubble telescope was valuable enough to merit the risk. 

In the buildup to the 2004 presidential election, a scuffle in the press occurred between O'Keefe and NASA climatologist James Hansen. In 2003, it was revealed, O'Keefe warned Hansen not to discuss humanity's role in global warming. "The administrator Mr. O'Keefe interrupted me," Dr. Hansen said in the New York Times, "he told me that I should not talk about dangerous anthropogenic interference, because we do not know enough or have enough evidence for what would constitute dangerous anthropogenic interference." O'Keefe's spokesperson said O'Keefe had not meant to admonish Hansen or suggest that research efforts should be cut. The New York Times reported that "Dr. Franco Einaudi, director of the NASA Earth Sciences Directorate at the Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Md., and Dr. Hansen's supervisor, said he was at the meeting between Dr. Hansen and Mr. O'Keefe. Dr. Einaudi confirmed that Mr. O'Keefe had interrupted the presentation to say that these were "delicate issues" and there was a lot of uncertainty about them. But, he added: "Whether it is obvious to take that as an order or not is a question of judgment. Personally, I did not take it as an order."

O'Keefe responded to President Bush's Vision for Exploration by hiring retired Navy Admiral Craig E. Steidle who had previously led development of the Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) as an associate administrator in charge of a new office: Exploration Systems Mission Directorate (ESMD). A mission architecture for lunar exploration was developed based on four launches of medium-lift vehicles and four space rendezvous per mission. This mission architecture was immediately scrapped by Michael Griffin upon his arrival at NASA. NASA started over with the Exploration Systems Architecture Study (ESAS), sixteen months after the Vision for Space Exploration (VSE) had been announced by President Bush. That architecture led to the Ares I and Ares V launch vehicles (later canceled) and the Orion Crew Exploration vehicle. 

O'Keefe tendered his resignation on December 13, 2004.

Asteroid 78905 Seanokeefe was named after O'Keefe in honor of his time as NASA Administrator.

Chancellor of Louisiana State University, 2005-2008
O'Keefe has been credited with the establishment of the Louisiana State University endowment through the Forever LSU fund raising campaign - his second campaign as LSU's Chancellor. The first, known as "Welcome to the Now (Evo Devo)," was not as successful. He became popular among students for his ability to interact with them, especially during Chats with the Chancellor, that occur across the campus periodically throughout the semesters, as well as his encouraging emails. He announced on January 16, 2008, that February 1, 2008 was his last day as chancellor.

O'Keefe lightly discussed his membership in the exclusive Bohemian Club to the Louisiana State University student newspaper The Daily Reveille. As a member of the Wayside Log camp, O'Keefe traveled during July 2005, to visit the famous Bohemian Grove near San Francisco, California. 

EADS North America / Airbus Group North American Unit, 2009-2014
In October 2009, O'Keefe was brought in as CEO of EADS North America. O'Keefe's Washington connections were noted at a time when EADS was trying to secure a $35 billion contract for U.S. Air Force in-air refueling planes in a competition with Boeing. O'Keefe brought aboard Paul Pastorek, the Louisiana state superintendent of education from 2007 to 2011, as the EADs chief counsel and corporate secretary. O'Keefe sustained serious injuries in an August 2010 seaplane crash, in which former US Senator Ted Stevens and four others were killed. In January 2011, O’Keefe assumed the additional responsibilities of chairman of the board of EADS, which was renamed Airbus Group's North American Unit. In March 2014 O'Keefe stepped down as Chief Executive to address lingering medical issues from his 2010 plane accident. 

Center for Strategic and International Studies / Syracuse University, 2014 until present
In November 2014 the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) announced that O'Keefe had joinded CSIS as a Distinguished Senior Adviser. Simultaneously Syracuse University announced that O'Keefe had been appointed as a University Professor. 

Personal life
O'Keefe and his wife, Laura, have three children. 
O'Keefe's great-grandfather was Arthur J. O'Keefe, Sr., who from 1926 to 1929 was the mayor of New Orleans, Louisiana. His grandfather, Arthur O'Keefe, Jr., was a member of the Louisiana State Senate from New Orleans from 1948 to 1950. His uncle is the former State Senate President, Michael H. O'Keefe.

