Kierland Commons is a lifestyle center in Phoenix, Arizona directly bordering Scottsdale, Arizona. The mixed use development is centered on a "Main Street" feel and composed mostly of outdoor retail shops with residential units above and adjoining residential tower.

Development
The mixed-use destination began construction in 1995 and was completed in 2000. The primary developer was Woodbine Development Corporation of Dallas. The development concept, urban design plan and design guidelines were prepared by Design Workshop, Inc. (Denver, CO) and Communication Arts, Inc. (Boulder, CO). Building design was developed and prepared by Nelsen Architects (now known as Nelsen Partners).

Kierland Commons was one of 10 developments honored as award winners by the www.bizjournals.com/phoenix/stories/2009/04/20/daily77.html Urban Land Institute's (ULI) 2009 Awards for Excellence; the 2009 winners were selected from a pool of 140 projects located across the Americas. The awards are widely considered the land-use industry’s most prestigious recognition program. Other awards Kierland Commons has received include the 2010 "Crescordia" Award for Environmental Excellence by the Phoenix Valley Forward Association and the 2004 Honor Award given by the Arizona Chapter of the American Society of Landscape Architects (ASLA).

Kierland Commons was the first lifestyle center in Arizona www.bizjournals.com/phoenix/stories/2005/05/02/focus1.html. The Main-Street-style development includes shopping, dining, entertainment, office space and upscale loft condiminiums, www.plazaloftskierland.com The Plaza Lofts. Kierland Commons was created to serve as the community gathering place for the master-planned community of www.kierland.com Kierland, whose notable features include The Westin Kierland Resort & Spa, the 27-hole Kierland Golf Club, as well as other residential and commercial entities.

Kierland Commons is home to about 75 stores, restaurants and services on approximately and cost approximately US$65 million to build. Like many shopping centers in the Phoenix area, it is managed by the Westcor division of Macerich, though majority ownership is held by the developer, Woodbine Development Corporation.

Some notable retailers at Kierland Commons include Anthropologie, Banana Republic, BCBG Max Azria, Bose, Charles David, Coach, Crate & Barrel, ECCO, Eileen Fisher, French Connection, Harari, Jacadi, Juicy Couture, J.Crew, Lucky Brand Jeans, Michael Kors, Seven for All Mankind and Tommy Bahama. On December 31st, 2014, Barnes and Noble closed.
 

The Plaza Lofts at Kierland Commons
The mixed-use development's residential component is composed of www.plazaloftskierland.com The Plaza Lofts at Kierland Commons, located above retail overlooking the central plaza on Main Street and in an adjacent nine-story tower. The Plaza Lofts holds the record for the highest price per square foot of any residential project in Arizona – at $1,051 per square foot on a sale made in February 2007.

The Scottsdale condo community features 84 residences in two phases. Phase I was completed spring 2005, with all 30 lofts selling out in 30 days with only on-site signage and word-of-mouth. Floor plans include one-bedroom and two-bedroom/study floor plans measuring 1,100 to .

Phase II of The Plaza Lofts was completed summer 2008. The nine-story tower contains 54 residences and offers one-bedroom to two-bedroom/study floor plans stretching 1,100 to . Five penthouse suites occupy the top floor, measuring 3,300 to with sweeping mountain, desert and city views.

Community amenities of The Plaza Lofts include a private residential parking garage; two reception lobbies with card-access entry (one per phase); a professional-grade fitness facility; two community rooms, one with a full kitchen and another with a catering-friendly setup; plazaloftskierland.com/amenities_lofts_scottsdale_real_estate/ a heated lap pool and whirlpool; as well as a bi-level outdoor amenity deck featuring fire pits, gas barbecues and comfortable seating areas and a water feature. 
 

