Clan Fraser is a Scottish clan of the Scottish Lowlands. It is not to be confused with the Clan Fraser of Lovat who are a separate Scottish clan of the Scottish Highlands (though with a common ancestry). Both clans have their own separate chief, both of whom are officially recognized by the Standing Council of Scottish Chiefs.

History

Origins of the clan

The Frasers are believed to have come from Anjou in France. The name Fraser may be derived from Fredarius, Fresel or Freseau. Another suggestion is that the Frasers were a tribe in Roman Gaul, whose badge was a strawberry plant (fraisier in French). The first Fraser to appear in Scotland was in about 1160 when Simon Fraser held lands at Keith in East Lothian .

Wars of Scottish Independence

About five generations after the first Simon Fraser, another Simon Fraser was captured fighting for Robert the Bruce and was executed in 1306 by Edward I of England. Simon’s cousin was Alexander Fraser of Cowie who was Bruce’s chamberlain. He married Bruce’s sister Mary. Alexander Fraser’s younger brother was another Sir Simon Fraser, from whom the chiefs of the Clan Fraser of Lovat are descended from. One of Simon Fraser’s grandsons was Sir Alexander Fraser of Cowie and Durris. This Alexander Fraser acquired a castle now called Cairnbulg Castle and the lands of Philorth by marriage to Joanna, younger daughter and co-heiress of the Earl of Ross in 1375.

Frasers of Philorth

In 1592, Sir Alexander Fraser of Philorth received charters from James VI of Scotland for the fishing village of Faithlie which later became the town of Fraserburgh. Sir Alexander Fraser was also authorized to found a university in the town but this scheme was short lived due to the religious troubles of the time.

The eighth Lord Philorth built Fraserburgh Castle which later became the Kinnaird Head lighthouse. This bankrupted him and Philorth Castle was lost from the family for over three hundred years until 1934 when it was bought back by the 19th Lord Saltoun.

Lords Saltoun

17th and 18th centuries

The ninth Laird of Philorth married the heiress of the Abernethy Lords Saltoun. Their son became the tenth Lord Saltoun who was severely wounded at the Battle of Worcester in 1651. He survived thanks to his servant, James Cardno, who rescued him from the battlefield. In 1666 the tenth Lord built Philorth house a mile from Fraserburgh which remained the family seat until it burned down in 1915.

Sir Alexander Fraser of Durris was personal physician to Charles II of England. He was educated at Aberdeen and accompanied the king on his campaign throughout 1650. After the Restoration he sat in the Scottish Parliament and he featured in the diaries of Samuel Pepys.

The Fraser family took no part in the Jacobite risings, although their distant Highland relatives in the Clan Fraser of Lovat were Jacobites.

19th and 20th centuries

The sixteenth Lord Saltoun commanded the Light Companies of the First Guards at the Battle of Waterloo in 1815. The nineteenth Lord Saltoun was a prisoner of war during World War I in Germany. Later, in 1936 he became a member of the House of Lords and promoted the Royal National Lifeboat Institution.

