The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation is a private foundation, established by Hewlett-Packard cofounder William Redington Hewlett and his wife Flora Lamson Hewlett in 1966. The Hewlett Foundation awards grants to a variety of liberal and progressive causes. It is one of the largest grant-giving institutions in the United States, with assets of over $7 billion.

The Foundation has grantmaking programs in education, the environment, global development and population, the performing arts, and philanthropy, and it also makes grants to aid disadvantaged communities in the San Francisco Bay Area. Since its inception, the Hewlett Foundation has made grants of over $4.5 billion to thousands of organizations in the San Francisco Bay Area, across the United States, and around the world.

In 2011, The Hewlett Foundation awarded a total of $202,844,000 in grants and disbursed $353,400,000 (estimate) in grant and gift payments. The Hewlett Foundation is based in Menlo Park, California.

The Hewlett Foundation is wholly independent of Hewlett-Packard and its Hewlett Packard Company Foundation.

Grants and major donations
The foundation plays a key leadership role in the nonprofit sector. Although most grants tend to be less than $1 million, the Hewlett Foundation has made several notable gifts and grants.

In 2001, the foundation gave $400 million to Stanford University for humanities, sciences, and undergraduate education. At the time, the gift was the largest on record to a university.

In 2007, the Hewlett Foundation made a $113 million donation to the University of California at Berkeley to create 100 new endowed professorships and provide financial help for graduate students.

In 2008, the foundation awarded the Climate Works Foundation approximately $460,800,000.

Other notable projects include:
*Collaboration with the nonprofit Center for Investigative Reporting to create California Watch, the state’s largest investigative reporting team dedicated solely to news within California.
*Collaboration with the Mellon Foundation to develop the field of OpenCourseWare. Through these efforts, MIT and many other educational institutions have made their curricular materials available to the public.
*Restoration of the Bay Area Salt Ponds and conservation of the Great Bear Rainforest in Canada.
*Seeding the Creative Commons project with $1,000,000.

Programs
The foundation focuses its resources on several key issues where it believes that it can have significant impact. About half of the foundation’s work is focused on international issues.

The foundation also makes grants to support local low-income communities and the field of philanthropy. With significant ties to the San Francisco Bay Area, the Hewlett Foundation’s core programs support nonprofit organizations that serve disadvantaged populations in the Bay Area.

Education Program
The Education Program makes grants to stimulate reforms and improve instruction in public schools and community colleges, and to create and distribute free online academic materials. In 2001, the Hewlett Foundation made a $400 million donation to Stanford University to support undergraduate programs in both the humanities and sciences.

In 2007, the Hewlett Foundation made a $113 million donation to the University of California at Berkeley to create 100 new endowed professorships and provide financial help for graduate students.

The Program’s K–12 education grantmaking in California focuses on improving student achievement and graduation rates. Their grantees conduct and disseminate high-quality research about California’s schools, assist policymakers, and build public support and political will for systemic reforms. The Program also supports research on improving the educational outcomes of community colleges.

The Education Program supports efforts to make high-quality academic content freely available on the Internet and to share these Open Educational Resources for teaching, learning, and research.

In May 2010 the Hewlett Foundation announced its strategy of Deeper Learning. Deeper learning brings together five elements that work in concert: mastering core academic content, critical thinking and problem solving, effective communication, working in collaboration, and learning how to monitor and direct one’s own learning.

Environment
The Environment Program makes grants to support conservation in the North American West, reduce global warming and conventional pollution resulting from the use of fossil fuels, and promote environmental protection efforts in California. The Hewlett Foundation opposes coal and natural gas development.

Global Development and Population
The Global Development and Population Program makes grants to promote "equitable" growth in the developing world. The program seeks to improve U.S. foreign assistance policies and encourage the use of evaluations that measure the impact of these policies. Additionally, the program supports organizations that monitor government budgets and expenditure and addresses issues including transparency and accountability in the use of public and private funds for development. It also make grants in developing countries to provide high quality basic education, family planning, and reproductive health. In the United States, the program supports access to quality family planning and reproductive health services. The Hewlett Foundation has given major financial support to Planned Parenthood and the International Planned Parenthood Federation.

Performing Arts Program
The Performing Arts Program provides multiyear operating support to hundreds of area organizations in dance, music, theater, and arts education, as well as in film, video, and emerging media. Grants are designed to foster participation in the arts, broaden appreciation of diverse cultural expressions and promote the long-term vitality of arts organizations. Grantees include both large, well-established organizations such as the San Francisco Symphony and the American Conservatory Theater and more experimental companies. In 2006, the Hewlett Foundation provided $10 million to the San Francisco Opera Association and $5 million to the San Francisco Symphony.

Philanthropy Program
The Philanthropy Program is designed to work with other nonprofit organizations to increase organizational effectiveness. The program provides tools to enable organizations to engage in strategic planning, and improve communications, technology, program evaluation, board development, and fundraising.

The Foundation also advances research about philanthropy—both in universities and in organizations, including the Center for Effective Philanthropy, The Bridgespan Group and the Foundation Strategy Group, with the goal of promoting knowledge useful to nonprofits and foundations.

The foundation also supports GiveWell.

Special opportunities
Although most grantmaking takes place within the Programs, Special Projects provides support to academic, research, and cultural institutions that do not fall within the guidelines of particular programs—for example, the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University’s School of Humanities and Sciences, and the University of California at Berkeley.

