Shuma-Gorath is a fictional character first mentioned in a short story by author Robert E. Howard, and later appeared in comic books published by Marvel Comics.

Publication history
Shuma-Gorath is first mentioned in the Robert E. Howard short story "The Curse of the Golden Skull," in The Howard Collector #9, Spring 1967, which features the character Kull. It was first mentioned by Robert E. Howard and was created by Steve Englehart and Frank Brunner. A dying magician named Rotath invokes the "iron-bound books of Shuma-Gorath" in a curse against humanity. The character's first actual comic-book appearance was as an adversary for Doctor Strange in Marvel Premiere #5 (November 1972).

Fictional character biography
During Earth's pre-history Shuma-Gorath ruled the world, and demanded human sacrifice until eventually banished by time-traveling sorcerer Sise-Neg. The entity eventually returns during the Hyborian Age, but is imprisoned within a mountain by the power of the god Crom. Shuma-Gorath continues to be an influence on Earth until returned to its home dimension by Crom.

When the entity tries to return to Earth via the mind of the Ancient One, his disciple Doctor Strange is forced to kill him to prevent this. Years later, Strange battles Shuma-Gorath in its home dimension, and although victorious, he gradually becomes a new version of the entity. Strange commits suicide to prevent this transformation and is resurrected by an ally. Sorcerer Nicholas Scratch summons the entity to Earth but it is driven back by the combined efforts of Doctor Strange, the Fantastic Four, the Salem's Seven, and villain Diablo. 

Shuma-Gorath is eventually revealed to be one of the four undying other-dimensional "multi-angled ones" guiding a metaphysical invasion from a dimension called the "cancerverse". In attempting to destroy Death itself, the entity and its allies are rendered inert by the conceptual form of Death and subsequently are trapped in the cancerverse when it is destroyed. Shuma-Gorath survives and once again attempts to invade Earth but is repelled by the superhero team the Avengers with the Spear of Destiny.

During the Fear Itself storyline, Shuma-Gorath is among the demons to meet at the Devil's Advocacy to discuss the threat of the Serpent and what this means to them.

During the Infinity storyline, Thanos' servant Ebony Maw manipulates Doctor Strange into summoning Shuma-Gorath to the streets of New York. The creature is met by Luke Cage and his new team of Avengers. Blue Marvel arrives at the scene of the battle and flies through Shuma-Gorath's head, destroying its physical manifestation. Shuma-Gorath's astral body possesses a crowd of people in New York City and attempts to recreate itself on Earth. It is weakened through mystical attacks by Power Man and White Tiger and finally banished by Monica Rambeau, who penetrates Shuma-Gorath's eye as a ray of light and disperses the entity from within.

Powers and abilities
Shuma-Gorath is an ancient force of chaos, the immortal, nigh-invincible and godlike ruler of nearly a hundred alternate universes, capable of energy projection, shapeshifting, teleportation, levitation, altering reality, and sympathetic magic among many other feats. He is described as being vastly more powerful than other mighty demonic enemies such as Satannish and Mephisto, and is capable of automatically destroying multiple galaxies through aura-pressure alone.

In other media
Video games
* Shuma-Gorath appears as a playable character in the Capcom fighting game Marvel Super Heroes and sequels Marvel Super Heroes vs. Street Fighter and Marvel vs. Capcom 2: New Age of Heroes. Shuma-Gorath returned as a playable character in Marvel vs. Capcom 3: Fate of Two Worlds and Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 as downloadable content. Frank Perry voiced the character in Marvel Super Heroes, Marvel Super Heroes vs. Street Fighter and Marvel vs. Capcom 2, and Paul Dobson in Marvel vs. Capcom 3 and Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3. Additionally, Shuma-Gorath's former disciple, Quoggoth, appears as an alternate costume for the character in Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3.

* Shuma-Gorath is also featured in the Doctor Strange virtual pinball game for Pinball FX 2 released by Zen Studios.

