The NRJ Group is a French multimedia group based in Paris. Its founders are Jean-Paul Baudecroux and Max Guazzini. Since its foundation in 1981 as a French pop music radio station it has grown and evolved to become the NRJ Group. NRJ is the most popular radio station in France with 6,159,000 listeners daily.

The Radio Record Group
The NRJ Group has transformed itself from one radio station to a brand of corporate commercial radio stations in Europe. Currently, it has stations in Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guadeloupe, Guyane, Lebanon, Martinique, Mayotte, New Caledonia, Norway, Réunion, Russia, Sweden, Switzerland and Tahiti. NRJ plays current, trendy music for young audiences. Their slogan is "Hit music only". 

The majority of NRJ-branded stations are operated by the NRJ Group, however some are licenced, such as the Bulgarian version, which is operated by Communicorp. Within France the NRJ Group operates four separate radio stations: NRJ, Nostalgie, Chérie FM and Rire & Chansons. They also operate the NRJ 12 and Chérie 25 digital terrestrial television stations, in addition to NRJ Paris and NRJ Hits music television stations in France.

In 1989 NRJ became listed on the Paris Stock Exchange Secondary Market and has continued to climb, reaching the First Market in 2000 after regrouping all of its assests into the NRJ Group.

In French, the pronunciations of NRJ and Energy (énergie) are identical, and sounds very similar to the English word Energy.

International
With its pan-European NRJ/ENERGY stations, the Paris-based NRJ Group has challenged the European radio market by being significantly different from diversifying market players like the Luxembourg-based RTL Group (Antenne Bayern, RTL Berlin, Yorin FM), and SBS Broadcasting (Radio 1 Norway, The Voice) or Stockholm-based MTG (P4 Norway, Rix FM, Lugna Favoriter).

Since June 6, 2006 NRJ has been operational in Lebanon, further expanding its reach and influence. On July 6, 2009, NRJ announced it would license its brand to Astral Media, owner of Canada's Énergie radio network, consisting of 10 regional stations in Quebec, along with a national broadcast as Énergie2 on Satellite Radio in Canada and in the United States (the Sirius Canada channel would be replaced in 2010 with Latitude franco). This is the first North American expansion for NRJ.

Since the mid-1990s, NRJ has licensed its 24/7 programming stream out of Paris, to Japan's largest cable system, Usen Corporation.

All of NRJ's international operations are concentrated on a contemporary hit radio station (with the same slogan, jingles, sound, etc...) while its competitors tend to create local radio brands with various radio formats, thereby taking advantage of their audience's local identity.

NRJ is today broadcasting in over 20 countries, mainly throughout Europe, but also in North America, South America and several overseas territories of France. The following is a list of current and defunct international stations, including France.
NRJ International Country Branded as Ownership Number ofFrequencies Launched Language Website Energy Österreich N&C Radio Privé (NRJ Group) 3 1998 German energy.at energy.at NRJ Belgique NRJ Group 26 1988 French www.nrj.be nrj.be Energy България Metro Radio 6 2006 Bulgarian www.nrj.bg/ nrj.bg NRJ Québec Bell Media 10 2009 French www.radionrj.ca radionrj.ca Energy Danmark NRJ Group 9 1998 to 2013 Danish www.nrj.dk/ nrj.dk NRJ Suomi Oy NRJ Group 27 1995 Finnish www.nrj.fi/ nrj.fi NRJ France NRJ Group 983 1981 French www.nrj.fr/ nrj.fr Energy Germany NRJ Group 34 1991 German www.energy.de/ energy.de Energy Hellas 2 2011 Greek nrjradio.gr/radio/ nrjradio.gr NRJ Guadeloupe 5 French nrjmartinique.fm nrjguadeloupe.fm NRJ Guyane ACG 3 2006 French www.nrjguyane.com/ nrjguyane.fm NRJ Lebanon NRJ Group 8 2006 English www.nrjlebanon.com nrjlebanon.com NRJ Mayotte NRJ Group 1 French www.nrj.fr nrj.fr NRJ Martinique 6 French nrjmartinique.fm nrjmartinique.fm NRJ Norge NRJ GroupModern Times Group 10 1998 Norwegian www.nrj.no nrj.no NRJ Nouvelle Calédonie Groupe Hersant Média 1 1995 French www.nrj.nc/ nrj.nc NRJ La Réunion Sogera-H2R 6 French www.nrj.re nrj.re Energy Россия Prof Media 11 2006 Russian www.energyfm.ru www.energyfm.ru NRJ Sverige SBS Discovery Media 3 1993 Swedish www.nrj.se/ www.nrj.se 
* NRJ Léman
* Energy Zürich
* Energy Bern
* Energy Basel
* Energy TV NRJ Group 8 3 4 1 ? 1988 French German German German www.nrjleman.com nrjleman.com www.energyzueri.ch energyzueri.ch www.energybern.ch energybern.ch www.energy.ch/basel energy.ch/basel NRJ Tahiti Groupe Hersant Média 3 French www.nrj.pf/ nrj.pf Energy Україна NRJ Group 0 Defunct Ukrainian www.nrj.com.ua/ nrj.com.ua

