Xcitement Wrestling Federation (XWF) was an American professional wrestling promotion. The organization's heyday was from early November 2001 to late February 2002. Its birth coincided with the World Wrestling Federation's acquisition of AOL Time Warner's World Championship Wrestling. XWF's slogan was "No more prima donnas, no more politics... In your face!". They looked to promote a product that the whole family could watch and enjoy by bringing back pro-wrestling storylines with a 21st-century spin as an alternative to sports entertainment. The previous number two and three American promotions, the aforementioned World Championship Wrestling and Extreme Championship Wrestling, had folded earlier in 2001, leaving only one national wrestling company. As such, the letter "X" in XWF stood for the missing variable in the industry. The official definition of the "X" became Xcitement as cited by "Mean" Gene Okerlund in the Extras on the XWF DVD and not "Xtreme" as sometimes written.

History

Beginning
The idea of the XWF was generated when several wrestling superstars including Hulk Hogan, Jimmy Hart, The Nasty Boys (Knobs and Saggs) and Greg Valentine were pitched the idea by Kevin Harrington of replacing the then AOL Time Warner owned World Championship Wrestling which was then purchased by rival competitor World Wrestling Federation. The basis of the XWF was to create a wrestling federation showcasing Family Friendly entertainment all while displaying talents of current Wrestling Legends and future superstars similar to the format that was used in WCW Saturday Night / WCW Main Event. The reason was to create a PG style of wrestling that was opposite of what WCW was since the NWO started. It would also give the wrestlers another place to work since the WWF had become the only game in town.

The TV Tapings
The initial XWF tapings were conducted in November 2001 at Universal Studios in Orlando, Florida in the soundstage that used to be the home for the WCW Worldwide Wrestling tapings, and later the home for the TNA Impact Wrestling tapings. Former WCW play-by-play announcer Tony Schiavone and former WWF color commentator Jerry Lawler were brought in to call the matches. Lawler had left the WWF earlier in the year, in protest, after he felt they had unfairly fired his then wife Stacy Carter. Shortly after the tapings, Lawler and Carter divorced, he mended fences with the WWF, and asked the XWF to be let out of his contract so that he could return there. They also brought in Mean Gene Okerlund to be their locker room interviewer. The storylines were based on a struggle for power in the company between Rena Mero Lesnar (formerly Sable in the WWF), who was the heel CEO, and Rowdy Roddy Piper, the babyface commissioner. The XWF Roster was a mixture of former WWF, WCW, and ECW Stars, as well as several indy stars. They brought in Hulk Hogan, with the hope that he would be a wrestler and a part owner of the company. He wrestled and defeated Curt Hennig (who was accompanied by his "agent" Bobby Heenan) in his only match at the tapings. In addition to Hogan and Hennig other stars included; Vampiro, Buff Bagwell, A.J. Styles, Christopher Daniels, the Nasty Boys, Hacksaw Jim Duggan, Jimmy Snuka Jr. (managed by Jimmy Snuka Sr.), Marty Jannetty, Greg Valentine, Horace Hogan, Ryan Sakoda (who wrestled as Vapor and was managed by Sonny Onoo), Low-Ki (who wrestled as Quick Kick), Kid Kash, Juventud Guerrera, Psicosis, Konnan, Carly Colón (who was accompanied by Carlos Colón, Sr.), Maximum Force (Simon Diamond and Johnny Swinger, who were managed by Dawn Marie), Johnny B. Badd, Norman Smiley, the KISS Demon (managed by Gene Simmons), Devon Storm (Crowbar in WCW), Big Vito, the Road Warriors, Public Enemy (who wrestled as the South Philly Posse), the Shane Twins, Josh Matthews, and Emory Hail (The Machine in WCW; managed by Jimmy Hart). Ten episodes were taped, and prepared for broadcast. Unfortunately, the talents were only signed for the initial set of tapings. Shortly after the tapings, WWF owner Vince McMahon signed away several of their key talents like Lawler, Hogan, Hennig, Piper, and others. Hart expressed his frustration in an interview. He explained that they would go to network executives to pitch the show. The executives would get excited by the roster, but Hart and company would then have to explain that several talents were no longer with the XWF and had gone to the WWF. They would then get turned down.

House Shows
Following the initial tapings held in fall 2001, the XWF held their first three shows in Hammond, Indiana, Milwaukee, Wisconsin and nearly filled the Brown County Arena in Green Bay, WI. In Spring 2002 the federation ran more shows. A series of house shows in Texas. In addition to the wrestlers that stayed on, the XWF brought in Rey Mysterio, who teamed with his longtime friend Konnan against the Nasty Boys, and hardcore legend Terry Funk, who wrestled Greg Valentine. The XWF scheduled a second series of house shows in Michigan, but ultimately had to cancel them due to low ticket sales. After not being able to secure a television deal, the promotion later folded.

Jimmy Hart era
Jimmy Hart acquired the rights for the XWF for an undetermined amount in 2004. In September 2004, the idea of bringing a special television series about the XWF to The Wrestling Channel and likely other channels thereafter was explored by Hart. During July 2005, the XWF released a three DVD series called In Your Face: The Lost Episodes of the XWF. It featured 19 matches from the original Universal Studios tapings with extras including an interview with Hulk Hogan. The series is hosted by Jimmy Hart and Brian Knobs. They also did a series of pay-per-views on DISH Network featuring matches from the tapings.

Redesign
In November 2008 the XWF re-launched its wrestling website displaying the new logo. In January 2009 it was rumored that there were talks of a possible pay-per-view similar to how Total Nonstop Action and Ring of Honor received their television deals. Also, footage from the XWF "invasion" of Puerto Rico in 2002 was to be released. Additionally, plans were underway to launch a series of matches featuring living legends from 2001, new up and coming talent, as well as having living remaining members make personal appearances for the XWF. A Special Collectors set including a DVD, T-Shirt, autographs, and an actual piece of the ring apron from the 2001 tapings was expected to be released later in 2009.

As of 2013, no further activity from the relaunched XWF has taken place, and the website has been taken down.

Titles and style
XWF’s wrestling style was to encompass Sports Entertainment, Rasslin, Puroresu and Lucha Libre, as many of the talent signed to the federation trained primarily in each or all of these styles of wrestling.

The XWF held four distinctive wrestling divisions with titles for each: The XWF Heavyweight Championship, the XWF Tag Team Championship, the XWF Cruiserweight Championship and the XWF Women’s Championship. Talks of a 5th championship were rumored and, if created, would have been a mid-card title similar to World Wrestling Entertainment’s Intercontinental and United States Championships or Total Nonstop Action’s Television Championship.

Final XWF championsChampionshipChampion(s)XWF Heavyweight ChampionMabelXWF Tag Team ChampionsThe Nasty BoysXWF Cruiserweight ChampionKid Kash XWF Women's ChampionChristie Ricci

