KPXM-TV virtual channel 41 (digital channel 40) is a television station based in Minneapolis, Minnesota and owned and operated by ION Media Networks (the former Paxson Communications). The station is an affiliate of the Ion Television network. Licensed to St. Cloud, it transmits from the KPXM Tower near the city of Big Lake (halfway between St. Cloud and the heart of the Twin Cities

Ion Television programming airs from 10 am until 5 am. 5 am until 10 am broadcasts consists of infomercials.

History
The station originally signed on the air in 1982 as KXLI ("XLI" is 41 in Roman numerals). The station identified themselves as K-41 and showed syndicated fare and cartoons. In 1988, the identity was changed to TV Heaven 41, airing reruns of classic shows in themed nights (westerns would air on one night, detective/mystery shows on another). KXLI was also simulcast on KXLT-TV channel 47 in Rochester, and by the late 1980s, Minnesota North Stars hockey broadcasts would also air on the stations.

In the late 1980s, KXLI and KXLT attempted to create the Minnesota Independent Network (MIN) along with Twin Cities station KTMA (now WUCW) and KVRR in Fargo, North Dakota. After a significant amount of planning and initial work, the plan fell through. A financial crisis led KXLI and KXLT to go off the air at the end of 1988 (KTMA also teetered financially for a time while KVRR, Fargo's Fox affiliate, was largely unaffected). KXLI and KXLT resurfaced in 1990 with religious and infomercial programming, which continued through their purchase by Lowell "Bud" Paxson in the mid-1990s.

From 1991 to about 1995 KXLI/KXLT aired programming from the Home Shopping Network. On Sunday morning and evenings there were religious programming airing. Saturday afternoons during this time consisted of local and national hunting programs. Programming originated from the transmitter building during this time in Big Lake.

Once it was decided to bring back the moniker of TV Heaven, money was spent on a new building near the tower. TV Heaven was brought back with programs from the 50s, 60, 70s, 80s and some new shows during the 90's. It also had agreements to air programming from an upstart conservative network NET (National Empowerment Television) run by Paul Weyrich. To that end, the stations nicknamed themselves the Political News Network. Late evenings were taken up by many different shopping networks.

In 1998, Paxson broke the KXLI/KXLT simulcast by selling the latter station (which became a Fox affiliate for the Rochester market). Paxson also changed KXLI's call letters to KPXM, and the station would join the Pax TV network (later i and now Ion Television) later in 1998. Upgrades to the equipment were made to make them more current than the 1970s La Kart tape switching equipment. Earlier, the station had moved to its current tower in Big Lake. It is the tallest structure in Minnesota, standing tall—nearly twice as high as the skyscrapers of downtown Minneapolis. The new tower more than doubled the station's coverage area, which was now comparable to those of the major Twin Cities stations.

KPXM originally had a marketing agreement with KARE channel 11 in which KPXM repeated KARE's evening newscasts tape-delayed by half an hour, and also transmits KARE's morning show again in the afternoon. This agreement ended in July 2005, when Paxson chose to end such agreements for all his stations.

In 2009 and 2012, the FCC authorized the station to move to a tower closer to the Twin Cities tower farm in Shoreview. However, that move has not yet occurred.

 Digital television 


Analog-to-digital conversion
KPXM-TV shut down its analog signal, over UHF channel 41, on June 12, 2009, the official date in which full-power television stations in the United States transitioned from analog to digital broadcasts under federal mandate. The station's digital signal remained on its pre-transition UHF channel 40. Through the use of PSIP, digital television receivers display the station's virtual channel as its former UHF analog channel 41.

Translator stations
The broadcast signal of KPXM is extended by way of two digital translators in central Minnesota.

*K17FA-D 17 Willmar
*K34AF-D 34 Alexandria

