The Frankfurt International School (FIS) is an English-language day school located in Oberursel, near Frankfurt am Main, Germany. Founded in 1961, it is the largest and second oldest international school in Germany and provides instruction to almost 1800 students from over fifty countries. 

FIS consists of the Primary School (First Steps to grade one), Elementary School (grades two to five), and Upper School (grades six to twelve). There is a second campus Wiesbaden-Naurod with around 200 students from age three to grade six. 


Curriculum and accreditation
FIS is accredited by the Council of International Schools and the New England Association of Schools and Colleges. It is also an International Baccalaureate (IB) World School and a founding member of that organisation. The school implements a curriculum based on the principles espoused in the Primary Years Program and International Baccalaureate Diploma Program.

Subjects taught include, but are not limited to, Economics, Business, History, Geography, Psychology, Physics, Biology, Chemistry, Mathematics at three different levels, Computer Science, Design and Technology, Visual Arts, Music and Theater. 
The school offers language instruction in German as the host country language and a variety of further language programs: English as a Second Language, First Language (mother tongue) in Korean, Japanese, Swedish and Dutch, with French or Spanish as foreign languages in grades 6-12. Instruction in additional languages is available in the after school program. Also all students in grades 2-12 have access to 24 languages through the Rosetta Stone online learning program.

Faculty and staff
The school employs almost 300 faculty and staff from 30 countries. Each member of the faculty has at least a bachelor’s degree or its equivalent and a teaching license from his or her respective country.

Facilities and technology
The facilities cover in Oberursel, Germany and feature a historic administration building (known as "Old Main"), and the three separate divisional school buildings. A new wing was finished in 2006 ("The Da Vinci Wing") to provide the departments of Science, Performing & Visual Arts, and Design & Technology with state-of-the-art facilities. Also present are two gymnasiums, an auditorium, one outdoor all-weather playing field, one grass field, and several playgrounds. A new large cafeteria was completed in 2011, and there are plans for further constructions concerning parking space. 

FIS operates an information technology network with computers, classroom Smart boards, mobile labs, laptops and wireless LAN.

Extracurricular activities
The schools sports teams are known as the "Frankfurt Warriors", they compete in volleyball, swimming, soccer, basketball, tennis, softball, baseball, golf, rugby, cross country, and track and field. In the end of the season, each team competes in ISSTs or SCISs.

FIS Recreation, Enrichment and Learning (REAL) program of after school activities provides students, parents and faculty with opportunities to spend time in a relaxed environment teaching and learning new skills beyond the classroom. It also gives students the opportunity to work and build friendships with students from many backgrounds and grades.

FIS offers many non-athletic activities. In the field of the performing arts students can be involved in orchestra, band, choir, dance and drama. Student groups participate in the Model United Nations and the Odyssey of the Mind and maths competitions. Furthermore students can take part in various charitable projects such as the Kalahari Experience, Habitat for Humanity, Project Compassion and the Poland Drive.

External links
*www.fis.edu/ Official school website
*www.state.gov/m/a/os/1423.htm Germany, Frankfurt: Frankfurt International School
*FIS's official www.facebook.com/FrankfurtInternationalSchool?rf=115184178494276 facebook and www.linkedin.com/company/frankfurt-international-school Linkedin pages







