"Always on My Mind" is an American country music song by Johnny Christopher, Mark James and Wayne Carson, recorded first by Gwen McCrae (as "You Were Always On My Mind") and Brenda Lee in 1972.

Allmusic lists over 300 recorded releases of the song in versions by dozens of performers. While Brenda Lee's version had stalled at #45 on the country charts in 1972, other performers would reach the top 20 in the United States and elsewhere with their own versions: Elvis Presley in 1972; John Wesley Ryles in 1979; Willie Nelson's Grammy Award winning version in 1982; Pet Shop Boys in 1987.

Composition
Wayne Carson said that he wrote the song in 10 minutes at his home in Springfield at his kitchen table and completed the song in studio with the assistance of Johnny and Mark.

Carson, who had the song about a year and one day, was finishing a recording session. Producer Chips Moman asked about recording "that mind" song, but added it would need a bridge. Wayne went upstairs to the studio's old piano, where he was trying to work out a bridge, when Johnny and Mark walked in the door, and he asked for their help to complete his song.

The trio felt that the song was finished and at first could not get anything to add, but Wayne explained that Moman was insisting that a bridge be added. So between them, the two-line bridge was created.

The song was passed to one of Elvis's bodyguards, who gave Presley the cut from the studio. Moman did not produce Presley's recording, but did record the Willie Nelson version years later.

Elvis Presley version

Elvis Presley recorded his version of "Always on My Mind" on March 29, 1972, a few weeks after his February separation from wife Priscilla. The song received immense fame and critical appreciation and is considered one of the standout songs of the '70s for Elvis. The song was released as the B-side of the "Separate Ways" single, which reached Gold status in the U.S for sales of over a million copies. It was listed as a double sided hit reaching number 16 on Billboard magazine's Hot Country Singles chart in November 1972. In the UK "Always on My Mind" was the hit song and "Separate Ways" was the B-side.

Chart performance of Elvis Presley's version1972 Weekly ChartPeakpositionUS Billboard Hot 10020US Hot Country Singles (Billboard)16US Adult Contemporary (Billboard)3Canadian RPM Country Tracks 4Dutch Top 40 17French Singles Chart56Swiss Singles Chart 39


John Wesley Ryles version

In 1979, John Wesley Ryles reached number 20 on the U.S. country charts with his rendition, entitled "You Are Always on My Mind", from the album Let the Night Begin.

A review in Billboard praised the "brightly mixed vocals" and "powerful production".

Chart performance of John Wesley Ryles's version1979 Weekly ChartPeakpositionU.S. Billboard Hot Country Singles 20Canadian RPM Country Tracks 24

Willie Nelson version

The song was recorded by Willie Nelson and released in the spring of 1982. The song raced to number one on Billboard magazine's Hot Country Singles chart that May, spending two weeks atop and total of 21 weeks on the chart. The song also did very well on Top 40 radio, peaking at number five on the Billboard Hot 100 for three weeks and staying on this chart for 23 weeks. In the year end charts, this version was Billboard's number one country song for 1982. This version also charted in a number of other countries.

Nelson's version would result in three wins at the 25th Grammy Awards in February 1983: songwriters Christopher, James and Carson won Song of the Year and Best Country Song; in addition, Nelson won for Best Male Country Vocal Performance.

This version also won Country Music Association awards in two consecutive years: 1982 Song of the Year and 1983 Song of the Year for songwriters Christopher, James and Carson; 1982 Single of the Year for Nelson, and; contributed to Nelson winning 1982 Album of the Year for the album "Always on My Mind".

Willie Nelson performed the number with Johnny Cash on the 1998 release of VH1 Storytellers: Johnny Cash & Willie Nelson. The song was also featured on a December 2009 ASPCA commercial.

On July 10, 1991, this version was certified platinum by RIAA. In 2008, the single was inducted to the Grammy Hall of Fame.

Nelson's version was prominently featured, in its entirety, in a season two (2013) episode of the HBO television series The Newsroom.

Chart performance of Willie Nelson's version
1982 Weekly ChartPeakpositionAustralian Kent Music Report39Belgian Top 40 (Flanders)31
Canadian RPM Country Tracks1Canadian RPM Adult Contemporary Tracks4Canadian RPM Top Singles10Dutch Singles Chart17Irish Singles Chart8U.S. Billboard Hot Country Singles1U.S. Billboard Hot Adult Contemporary Tracks2U.S. Billboard Hot 1005U.K. Singles Chart49
 1982 Year-End ChartPositionCanadian RPM Top Singles70U.S. Billboard Hot 10022U.S. Billboard Hot Adult Contemporary Tracks8U.S. Billboard Hot Country Singles1U.S. Cashbox Top 10031

Pet Shop Boys version

In 1987, Pet Shop Boys performed a synthpop version of "Always on My Mind" on Love Me Tender, an ITV network UK television special commemorating the tenth anniversary of Presley's death, in which various popular contemporary acts performed cover versions of his hits. Their performance was so well-received that the duo decided to record the song and release it as a single. This version became the UK's Christmas number one single that year, topping the charts for four weeks in total, and reached number four on the US Billboard Hot 100.

The Pet Shop Boys version introduces a harmonic variation not present in the original version. In the original the ending phrase "always on my mind" is sung to a IV-V7-I cadence (C-D7-G). The Pet Shop Boys extend this cadence by adding two further chords: C-D7-Gm7/B-C-G (i.e. a progression of IV-V7-IIIb-IV-I).

In November 2004, The Daily Telegraph newspaper placed the version at number two in a list of the fifty greatest cover versions of all time. In October 2014, a public poll compiled by the BBC saw the song voted the all-time best cover version.

In the video for Pet Shop Boys' version of "Always on My Mind" (an excerpt from their surreal music film It Couldn't Happen Here), Neil Tennant and Chris Lowe are seated in the front of a taxi cab, when an eccentric passenger gets in, played by notable British actor Joss Ackland. At the end of the song, he gets out of the car, which drives away. Standing alone, he mutters: "You went away. It should make me feel better. But I don't know how I'm going to get through", which is part of the lyrics for another Pet Shop Boys track, "What Have I Done to Deserve This?".

In 1988, the duo remixed the song for their third studio LP, Introspective, combining it with an acid-house track called "In My House".

In 2008, Konami used the song for Dance Dance Revolution X which was released for both arcades and the Sony PlayStation 2 console. In 2010, the song was re-used for Dance Dance Revolution X2 which was released for arcades.

Chart performance of Pet Shop Boys' versionChart (1987/1988)PeakpositionAustralian Singles Chart10Austrian Singles Chart2Belgian Singles Chart2Canadian Singles Chart1Dutch Singles Chart5European Singles Chart1Finland (Suomen virallinen lista)1French Singles Chart22German Singles Chart1Irish Singles Chart2Italian Singles Chart9New Zealand Singles Chart8Norwegian Singles Chart3Polish Singles Chart1South African Singles Chart3Spain (AFYVE) 1Swedish Singles Chart1Swiss Singles Chart1UK Singles Chart1U.S. Billboard Hot 1004U.S. Billboard Dance/Club Play Songs Chart8U.S. Billboard Hot Dance Music/Maxi-Singles Sales Chart12

Other cover versions
*In 2013, the Spanish national Christmas lottery advertisement covered this song with various popular Spanish artists, including Montserrat Caballé. 
*Joyce Meyerdid a version of the song for her husband Dave Meyer when she did a sermon entitled "I was always on my mind," in which she calls her husband up, and then sings the version of the song for him; he replies "that's all true," 
* Mary Elizabeth McGlynn recorded a downtempo cover version for Silent Hill: Shatered Memories
















