Xenia Sergeyevna Onatopp is a supporting villain in the James Bond film GoldenEye, played by actress Famke Janssen.

In the film
Xenia, born in the Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic, is a former officer and fighter pilot in the Soviet Air Force. After the collapse of the Soviet Union, she joins the crime syndicate Janus, led by renegade MI6 agent Alec Trevelyan. Early in the movie, Bond gets into a car chase with her, meets her at a casino, and places her under surveillance.

A beautiful, seductive woman who derives sexual satisfaction from killing, she is a classic and quite literal femme fatale. In one scene, she lures a Canadian admiral, Chuck Farrell, onto a yacht moored off Monte Carlo and, engaging in violent sexual intercourse, suffocates him to death by squeezing her legs around him incredibly hard; she moans in pleasure as he moans in pain, and reaches orgasm as he dies. Meanwhile, a fellow operative (General Arkady Grigorovich Ourumov) steals his NATO ID, granting them access to a Eurocopter Tiger aboard a French warship anchored off Monte Carlo.

Onatopp then hijacks the prototype Eurocopter Tiger by killing the two pilots. Later, she and turncoat Russian General Arkady Ourumov use the hijacked Tiger in an attack on the Severnaya satellite control center in central Siberia, where they steal the controller for the GoldenEye electromagnetic pulse (EMP) satellite weapon. During the attack, she fires an AKS-74U carbine around the control room, murdering all the military personnel and civilian technicians present, again getting sexually aroused in the process (something that clearly disturbs Ourumov, as we can see in his face). She then appears as Bond's link to the Janus group. In a meeting arranged by Bond's dealings with Valentin Zukovsky, a Russian arms dealer and former KGB agent, Onatopp arrives to meet Bond as he swims lengths in the Turkish Baths of his hotel - The St. Petersburg Grand. Initially sneaking around the pool, Bond discovers her presence and hurls her into the steam room. Onatopp attempts to seduce Bond, forcefully kissing him and coercing the agent to set down his weapon, before biting his lip, causing him to hurl her at the wall. Following a period of violent foreplay where Onatopp crushes Bond between her thighs, Bond finally draws his weapon on her and demands to be taken to Janus.

In her final encounter with Bond in Cuba, she ambushes him and Natalya Simonova by rappeling from a helicopter and begins torturing him between her legs. However, Bond is able to connect the rope she rappelled down to her safety harness, grabs her AK-74 rifle, and shoots down the helicopter with her rifle. The result pulls Onatopp off Bond and sends her flying, screaming, into the crotch of a tree, with her safety harness ironically crushing her by the stomach to death. Bond quips, "She always did enjoy a good squeeze."

In video games
Onatopp has appeared in a number of James Bond video games as a playable multiplayer character.

Her first appearance was in the 1997 video game adaptation of GoldenEye, GoldenEye 007 for the Nintendo 64. She is with Trevelyan on the train stage of the game. If the player quickly shoots her after eliminating Ourumov, she will yell to Trevelyan that she is wounded and to wait up for her; this buys the player more time to escape from the train. She later reappears in the jungle stage. Similar to the film, she is killed in the jungles of Cuba in a firefight with Bond. Killing Onatopp is the only way for the player to dual-wield two different guns in the game without a complex series of button presses; she uses an RC-P90 and a grenade launcher at the same time.

In the James Bond game Nightfire, Onatopp also appears as a multiplayer character. She can be unlocked by a cheat on the cheats menu as JANUS, the organization she works for in the movie.

She later appeared in the spinoff Bond game GoldenEye: Rogue Agent where she works for Dr. Julius No and is Agent GoldenEye's alluring opponent. She is commander of Dr. No's army, which has taken over the Hoover Dam. She is killed after being thrown off of the Hoover Dam while fighting Goldeneye. In the game she was voiced by actress Jenya Lano.

She appears in the GoldenEye remake as a former Russian general who served under Ouromov during the Russian invasion of Georgia. Her plot arc is significantly changed for the remake. She now appears in the new Nightclub level (where Bond first meets her) disguised as a waitress, and assassinates Valentin Zukovsky after he gives vital information about Janus to Bond - the man is framed for the murder of Zukovsky. She also betrays and assassinates General Ouromov in the train level in which she now appears. During her final confrontation with Bond, she is lowered down to him from a helicopter and proceeds to engage in hand-to-hand combat with him; she is defeated when Bond launches a missile at her helicopter while she is strangling him, the helicopter crashing into a nearby gorge and dragging her down with it. She is voiced by and modeled after Kate Magowan.

Reception


Xenia Onatopp has appeared in lists of the top ten Bond Girls, including by Entertainment Weekly and Dose. Yahoo! Movies had her name included in the list of the best Bond girl names, even while calling it a "slightly-too-obvious pun." Norwegian director Tommy Wirkola said he has had a crush on Janssen since he saw her in GoldenEye as Xenia Onatopp, "an amazing villain".

The character was parodied in the Austin Powers film Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me with a character named Ivana Humpalot.

