The Yasin Valley(یاسین ), Tehsil Yasin or Babaye-i-Yasen (بابائے یاسین) or Worshigum (ورشیگوم) is a high mountain valley in the Hindu Kush mountains, in the northwest Ghizer District in Gilgit-Baltistan, Pakistan. Yasin is separated from the Ishkoman Valley by a high mountain pass. To reach Yasin one must take the Karakoram Highway north from Islamabad, and then turn left to reach Gupis in Ghizar. After Gupis, one continues northwest to reach the Yasin Valley. Yasin valley has a spectacular natural beauty.

 History 
Yasin was originally ruled by the Khushwakhte Dynasty, a collateral line of the Katur Dynasty of Chitral. The Rajas of Yasin were great warriors and fought against the Sikhs and the Dogras of Kashmir, but this house eventually lost power and the ownership of Yasin changed hands several times between the Mehtar of Chitral, and the Maharaja of Kashmir.

British era
Although sparsely populated, Yasin was of strategic importance because it leads to a high mountain pass, to Yarkhun in Chitral, and then to Broghol Pass, the Wakhan Corridor of Afghanistan, and into Tajikistan. Thus, Yasin could have formed an invasion route from Czarist Russia into British India.

People
The primary language of Yasin Valley is the Burushaski language. The Khowar language is also spoken.

The majority of the people in Yasin are Ismailis who lead their lives according to the Islamic principles more concerned with the imam of the time. Currently Aga Khan IV is the imam and spiritual leader of the Ismailis. However, other sects of Islam such as Sunni and Shia also live in Yasin.

Ethnically, the people of Yasin are of Burusho origin; however, there are the migrants from different parts of the country, mainly from Chitral and even from outside the country, such as Central Asia.

The people of Yasin are known for their honesty, hard work, and bravery.

 Villages 
Administratively, Yasin is a Tehsil of Ghizer District. It is further divided into four local councils: Yasin, Sultanabad, Silgan, and Thoi.
Yasin consists of the villages of Chiliharang, Damalgan, Gindai, Noh, Morka, Atkash, Bujayot, Manichi, Thodass, and Nazbar Valley. Thodass is the headquarters of this union council.
Sultanabad union council consists of the villages of Chumarkhan, Taus, Barkhachi, Sultanabad (Met, Huyelti), Ghojalti, Sandi, Dalsandi, and Qorqolti Valley. Taus is the headquarters of this union council.
Selgaan union council consists of the villages of Barandass, Barkolti, Chilpi, Sheghetan, Hundoor, Terchet, Umalsat and Darkut, which leads to the Pass to Boroghol. Hundoor is the headquarters of this union council.
Thoi union council consists the villages of Ghaingchel, Ishkaibar, Karimabad, Dalkoi, Dapis, drach, Harp, Rahimabad, Kuno, Shot, Chiryat, Ishqamdass, Draskin, Nalti, dass, Thelti, Ishqamghoro, Mahrakabun, and Mushibarnala, which leads to Yarkhun Pass. Harp is the headquarters of this union council.

 Passes 
The Darkut Pass connects Yasin with Broghol Pass and Chitral, while the Thoi Pass connects Yasin to Yarkhun Chitral. Asumber pass connects Yasin to Ishkomen. Darkot Pass is an historical pass which has been labelled as a restricted zone by the government of Pakistan. This pass used to be the shortest means of communication between the Oxus and Indus. Most tourism is along the Assumbur Pass to the Ishqamen valley.

 External links 
* www.yasinvalley.com Representative web site of the Valley





