Sonepur is a town in the Indian state of Bihar, situated on the banks of the River Gandak in Saran district in the Indian state of Bihar. It hosts one of the world's largest Animal Fair which starts on Kartik Poornima.

Geography
The town is located at at an altitude of 42 metres (137 ft).

The river Gandak must have been the route of the movement of Buddha and his followers from Nepal Tarai to Magadh that is why many of the stupas and similar structures, including Ashoka pillars, are found on the banks of the river. The location of Pathar ki Maszid just opposite the meeting point of the gandak, that is southern bank of the Ganges, shows the Muslim influence of trade and commerce in medieval times. The current township Patna is just the modern version of the makeshift headquarters of military establishments of old Patna city which in turn was later version of Pataliputra, the capital of Maurya Empire.

Of the ten railway stations in the world having the longest railway platforms, Sonepur being on the 8th (and 2nd longest at the time of construction) longest platform in the world at . It is connected by two rivers, the Ganges and the Gandak.

Transportation and Connectivity
Sonepur is a town located in the Saran District of Bihar and is easily accessible via Railways, Roadways, Waterways and Airways.

Roadways
Sonepur is merely 25 km from Patna and 58 km from Muzaffarpur in Bihar. Buses, Taxis and Auto-rickshaws are easily available.

Railways
The Nearest Railway Station is Sonepur Jn. It has the 8th Largest Railway Platform in the World. It has trains connecting almost every part of India. It is the divisional headquarters of the East Central Railway of the Indian Railways.

Waterways
BSTDC organizes ferries to Sonepur during the Season of Sonepur Cattle Fair.

Demographics
 India census, Sonpur had a population of 33,389. Males constitute 53% of the population and females 47%. Sonepur has an average literacy rate of 60%, higher than the national average of 59.5%: male literacy is 70%, and female literacy is 48%. In Sonpur, 16% of the population is under 6 years of age.

Cattle Fair


The World Famous Sonepur Cattle Fair is organized every year during November–December. It is considered by many as World’s Largest Cattle Fair where one can find large number of Elephants. Major attraction is the sight of numerous elephants, beautifully decorated for the purpose of sale.

Hariharnath Mandir
Hariharnath Mandir in Sonpur is also known for the famous temple of shree Hariharnath and the site of the battle of Gaj-Grah and rescue of the former by Hari During Kartik Purnima Ganga Snan or ceremonial bathing in the Ganges is held by Hindus to be unusually efficacious. On the day of full moon (Kartik Purnima) immense crowd assembles and take bath. The Mela commences on that day and lasts for more than a fortnight. The Shiva temple, Kali temple and other temples and historical religious monuments are situated here and social and economical activities are at the highest peak during the Mela period. People come here to pay their oblation to the lords and thus its importance is not within Sonpur of Bihar rather it is of India and world fame.

Education
Education services in Sonpur is being provided by private as well as government schools and colleges. Kendriya Vidyalaya is one of the notable school and is up to the senior secondary level with Science stream.

