Josiane Balasko (born Josiane Balašković, 15 April 1950 in Paris) is a French actress, writer and director.

 Life 
One of Balasko's most recognized roles among English speakers is as a lesbian in 1995's Gazon maudit (French Twist). She won the 1996 César Award (shared with Telsche Boorman) for best writing for this film, for which she was also nominated as best director. The movie itself was nominated for best film.

Balasko's other César nominations for best actress were for Trop belle pour toi (1989), Tout le monde n'a pas eu la chance d'avoir des parents communistes (1993), Cette femme-là (2003).

She is married to George Aguilar, who is also an actor.

 1973-1980 : The beginning 

Josiane began her career in 1973. She was 23 years old when she first appeared on screen, in the short "L'Agression", with Patrick Bouchitey. She also made her debut in cinema in the movie "L'an 01", directed by Jacques Doillon, with François Cavanna, Christian Clavier, Coluche, Gérard Depardieu, Lee Falk, Marcel Gotlib, Jacques Higelin, Gérard Jugnot, Nelly Kaplan, Patrice Leconte, Stan Lee, Thierry Lhermitte and Miou-Miou.

After three years of absence, she returned to the screen in 1976, in the film The Tenant directed by Roman Polanski, with a screenplay was written by him and Gérard Brach. The movie was based on a novel written by Roland Topor and it starred Isabelle Adjani, Melvyn Douglas, Jo Van Fleet, Lila Kedrova, Claude Piéplu, Rufus, Jacques Monod, Michel Blanc and Shelley Winters.

Her career really exploded in 1977, with her appearing in seven films over the course of the year. She first appears in "Solveig et le Violon turc", with Eugène Ionesco and Dominique Lavanant. Then, she played Simone in "Une fille unique" alongside her boyfriend at time, Bruno Moynot. She made an appearance in Animal, directed by Claude Zidi, on a screenplay written by him, Michel Audiard and Dominique Fabre. The movie starred Jean-Paul Belmondo, Raquel Welch, Jane Birkin, Johnny Hallyday, Yves Mourousi, Claude Chabrol, Julien Guiomar, Aldo Maccione and Richard Bohringer. It was a big success with more than three million of entries in France, the movie was #5 in 1977 in France. She also play in Pardon Mon Affaire, Too!, directed by Yves Robert and written by him and Jean-Loup Dabadie, it starred Jean Rochefort, Claude Brasseur, Guy Bedos, Victor Lanoux, Danièle Delorme, Marthe Villalonga, Jean-Pierre Castaldi and Daniel Gélin. The movie was also a big success with more than two million of entries in France, it was #8 in 1977 in France. She played Nadine in This Sweet Sickness, directed by Claude Miller, based on a novel written by Patricia Highsmith. The movie starred Gérard Depardieu, Miou-Miou, Claude Piéplu, Dominique Laffin and Christian Clavier. She also acted, under the direction of Philippe Monnier, in "Monsieur Papa", in which the dialogue was written by Jean-Marie Poiré. She starred alongside Claude Brasseur, Nathalie Baye, Daniel Auteuil and Éva Darlan. Finally, she appears (in an uncredited role) in Herbie Goes to Monte Carlo, directed by Vincent McEveety, written by Don Nelson and starring Dean Jones, Don Knotts, Julie Sommars, Jacques Marin, Roy Kinnear, Bernard Fox, Eric Braeden, Johnny Haymer and Gérard Jugnot. With almost three millions of entries in France and nearly 30 millions worldwide, the movie was a big success.

In 1978, she play in "Si vous n'aimez pas ça, n'en dégoûtez pas les autres", with Gérard Jugnot and Thierry Lhermitte, and in "Les Petits Câlins", directed by Jean-Marie Poiré, alongside Dominique Laffin, Françoise Bertin and Gérard Jugnot. Then, she play in "La Tortue sur le dos", with Jean-François Stévenin, Bernadette Lafont, Claude Miller, Marion Game, Valérie Quennessen, Michel Blanc, Marie-Anne Chazel and Christian Clavier. She had the leading role in the comedy "Pauline et l'Ordinateur", in which she wrote the dialogue and where she play next to Gérard Jugnot, Éva Darlan, Jacques Attali and Marie-Anne Chazel. Finally, she play Nathalie Morin in the cult comedy Les Bronzés, directed by Patrice Leconte, and with her friends from Le Splendid, Marie-Anne Chazel, Michel Blanc, Gérard Jugnot, Thierry Lhermitte, Christian Clavier and Dominique Lavanant. The movie was a hit with more than two millions of entries.

In 1979, She play Emma-Ammé in one episode of the TV Mini-Series, "Les Quatre Cents Coups de Virginie", alongside Anémone. Then she play Nathalie Morin again, in the sequel Les Bronzés font du ski with the same cast, who was also a success with more than a millions of entries. She also appeared as a client in the movie "Les héros n'ont pas froid aux oreilles", with Daniel Auteuil, Gérard Jugnot, Roland Giraud, Gérard Lanvin, Michel Blanc, Thierry Lhermitte, Marie-Anne Chazel and Christian Clavier.

 1981-1990 : Success & Directing Debut 
The year 1981 was very successful for Josiane. First, she play Louise in Clara et les Chics Types, with Daniel Auteuil, Christian Clavier, Thierry Lhermitte, Isabelle Adjani, Roland Giraud and Philippe Nahon. Then, she had the leading role in the very successful comedy Les hommes préfèrent les grosses. The movie is a big success with almost two millions of entries. It's directed by Jean-Marie Poiré, written by Balasko and him and it starred Daniel Auteuil, Dominique Lavanant, Thierry Lhermitte, Martin Lamotte and François Berléand. After this, she play in an other comedy nammed Le Maître d'école, directed by Claude Berri. She play Mlle Lajoie alongside Coluche, Charlotte de Turckheim and Roland Giraud. The movie was also a huge success with more than 3 millions of entries, this is the #9 movie at the french Box Office in 1981. And then, she play Colette, a supporting role, in Hotel America directed by André Téchiné, with Catherine Deneuve, Patrick Dewaere and Dominique Lavanant.

In 1982, she's back with Le Splendid (and Anémone) and together they made an other cult movie : Le Père Noël est une ordure. Josiane is directed for the third time by Jean-Marie Poiré. The movie is again a big success with more than a million and a half of entries in France.

In 1983, she continue to follow her road with two comedy hit. First, an other cult movie with Le Splendid, Papy fait de la résistance. The movie is there again directed by Jean-Marie Poiré, and Le Splendid play alongside Michel Galabru, Dominique Lavanant, Jacques Villeret, Roland Giraud, Martin Lamotte, Pauline Lafont, Julien Guiomar, Jean Carmet, Jean-Claude Brialy and Bernard Giraudeau. More than 4 millions of entries for this movie who become #7 in the 1983 French box office. Then, she play the leading role in the comedy Signes extérieurs de richesse, directed by Jacques Monnet. Claude Brasseur, Jean-Pierre Marielle, Roland Giraud, Pascale Ogier, Charlotte de Turckheim and Jean Reno also starred in the movie. It's an other success for Balasko, with more than a million of entries.

In 1984, she play a supporting role in the comedy P'tit Con, directed by Gérard Lauzier. The cast include Guy Marchand and Daniel Auteuil. Then, she had the leading role in an other comedy, La Smala, directed by Jean-Loup Hubert. She play alongside Victor Lanoux, Dominique Lavanant, Thierry Lhermitte and Martin Lamotte. Finally, she play a supporting role in the comedy La vengeance du serpent à plumes directed by Gérard Oury. Coluche has the leading role of this comedy. The movie is Josiane biggest success of the year with more than two and a half millions of entries in France.

In 1985, she appeared in the movie Tranches de vie directed by François Leterrier. In the cast we can see Laura Antonelli, Michel Boujenah, Jean-Pierre Cassel, Christian Clavier, Jean-Pierre Darroussin, Audrey Dana, Marie-Anne Chazel, Roland Giraud, Pierre Mondy, Daniel Prévost, Gérard Jugnot, Michel Galabru, Anémone and Martin Lamotte. But this year will be mostly important for Balasko who made her directional debut with the comedy Sac de noeuds. She directed, write and starred in the movie. The cast include Isabelle Huppert, Jean Carmet, Coluche and Dominique Lavanant.

 Filmography 

 Actress Year Title Role Director Notes 1973 L'Agression Frank Cassenti Short L'An 01 Jacques DoillonAlain ResnaisJean Rouch 1976 The Tenant Office Worker Roman Polanski1977 Solveig et le Violon turc Jean-Jacques Grand-Jouan Une fille unique Simone Philippe Nahoun Animal The Supermarket Girl Claude Zidi Pardon Mon Affaire, Too! Josy Yves Robert This Sweet Sickness Nadine Claude Miller Monsieur Papa Philippe Monnier Herbie Goes to Monte Carlo Vincent McEveety1978 Si vous n'aimez pas ça, n'en dégoûtez pas les autres A spectator Raymond Lewin Les Petits Câlins Corinne Jean-Marie Poiré La Tortue sur le dos Luc Béraud Pauline et l'Ordinateur Pauline Francis Fehr Les Bronzés Nathalie Morin Patrice Leconte1979 Les Quatre Cents Coups de Virginie Emma-Ammé Bernard Queysanne TV Mini-Series Les Bronzés font du ski Nathalie Morin Patrice Leconte (2) Les héros n'ont pas froid aux oreilles A client Charles Nemes1981 Clara et les Chics Types Louise Jacques Monnet Les hommes préfèrent les grosses Lydie Langlois Jean-Marie Poiré (2) Le Maître d'école Mlle Lajoie Claude Berri Hotel America Colette André Téchiné1982 Le Père Noël est une ordure Madame Musquin Jean-Marie Poiré (3) 1983 Signes extérieurs de richesse Béatrice Flamand Jacques Monnet (2) Papy fait de la résistance The pharmacist Jean-Marie Poiré (4)1984 P'tit Con Rolande Gérard Lauzier La Smala Simone Jean-Loup Hubert La Vengeance du serpent à plumes Jackie Gérard Oury1985 Sac de noeuds Anita Josiane Balasko Tranches de vie The Parisian François Leterrier1986 Nuit d'ivresse Fred Bernard Nauer Les Frères Pétard Aline Hervé Palud 1987 Les Keufs Mireille Molineux Josiane Balasko (2) 1988 Sans peur et sans reproche A handmaid Gérard Jugnot1989 Une nuit à l'Assemblée nationale The Journalist Jean-Pierre Mocky Too Beautiful for You Colette Chevassu Bertrand Blier Nominated - César Award for Best Actress1991 My Life Is Hell Leah Lemonier Josiane Balasko (3) Les Secrets professionnels du Dr Apfelglück The scientist Alessandro Capone, Stéphane Clavier and Mathias Ledoux 1993 Tout le monde n'a pas eu la chance d'avoir des parents communistes Irène Jean-Jacques Zilbermann Nominated - César Award for Best Actress L'Ombre du doute Sophia Aline Issermann 1994 Grosse Fatigue Herself Michel Blanc 1995 French Twist Marijo Josiane Balasko (4) 1997 Didier Madame Massart Alain Chabat Arlette Arlette Bathiat Claude Zidi (2) 1998 Un grand cri d'amour Gigi Ortega Josiane Balasko (5) 1999 Le Fils du Français Suzanne Gérard Lauzier (2)2000 Le Libertin Baroness Holbach Gabriel Aghion Les Acteurs André Dussollier 2 Bertrand Blier (2) Chicken Run Bernadette's Voice Peter Lord and Nick Park2001 A Crime in Paradise Lucienne Braconnier (Lulu) Jean Becker Absolument fabuleux Edith Mousson (Eddie) Gabriel Aghion (2) 2002 The Race Madame Jo Djamel Bensalah 2003 Cette femme-là Michèle Varin Guillaume Nicloux Nominated - César Award for Best Actress 2004 Madame Édouard Nina Tchitchi Nadine Monfils2005 L'Ex-femme de ma vie Marie-Pierre Sarrazin/Jean-Eusèbe Josiane Balasko (6) La vie est à nous ! Blanche Delhomme Gérard Krawczyk J'ai vu tuer Ben Barka Marguerite Duras Serge Le Péron 2006 Les Bronzés 3: Amis pour la vie Nathalie Morin Patrice Leconte (3)2007 L'Auberge rouge Rose Martin Gérard Krawczyk (2) La Clef Michèle Varin Guillaume Nicloux (2) Ruby Blue Stéphanie Jan Dunn2008 Musée haut, musée bas Chanel's Mother Jean-Michel Ribes Cliente Irène Josiane Balasko (7) 2009 Bancs publics (Versailles Rive-Droite) Solange Renivelle Bruno Podalydès The Hedgehog Renée Michel Mona Achache Neuilly sa mère! The director of Saint-Exupéry Gabriel Julien-Laferrière 2010 Holiday Christiane Mercier Guillaume Nicloux (3)2011 Beur sur la ville Mamie Nova Djamel Bensalah (2) A Happy Event Claire Rémi Bezançon2012 Sport de filles Joséphine de Silène Patricia Mazuy Maman Paulette Mine Alexandra Leclère Mes héros Olga Eric Besnard 2013 Demi-sœur Antoinette Josiane Balasko (8)2014 Les gazelles Brigitte Mona Achache (2) Tante Hilda ! Dolorès's voice Benoît Chieux'Jacques-Rémy Girerd2014-15 La loi de Barbara Barbara Malo Didier Le Pêcheur TV Series (3 Episodes)

 Director Year TitleNotes 1985 Sac de noeuds 1987 Les keufs 1991 My Life Is Hell 1995 French Twist César Award for Best Writing Palm Springs International Film Festival - Best Foreign Language Film Lumière Film Festival - Best Writing Nominated - Golden Globe Award for Best Foreign Language Film Nominated - César Award for Best Film Nominated - César Award for Best Director Nominated - GLAAD Media Award for Outstanding Film – Limited Release Nominated - Festival du Film Francophone - Film in Competition 1998 Un grand cri d'amour 2004 L'ex-femme de ma vie 2008 Cliente Nominated - Sundance Film Festival for Grand Jury Prize : World Cinema Dramatic Nominated - Rome Film Festival for Golden Marc'Aurelio Award Nominated - City of Lights, City of Angels - In Competition Nominated - Hublot d'Or - Best Adaptation Nominated - Young Public Award - Best Adaptation Nominated - RAIMU Award - Best Comedy Film Nominated - RAIMU Award - Best Actress Nominated - RAIMU Award - Best Screenplay Nominated - RAIMU Award - Best Direction Nominated - Festival du Film Francophone - Film in Competition 2013 Demi-soeur 

