X!NK is a Belgian pop punk group. The band consists of two pairs of brothers: Jonas and Niels Meukens, and Thomas and Philip Valkiers. Jonas is the lead singer and occasionally the second guitarist, his brother Niels is the drummer. Philip plays the bass guitar and Thomas plays the guitar and also occasionally the keyboard. Their career took off after they won the Belgian national finals of the Eurosong for Kids 2003 and placed sixth in the Junior Eurovision Song Contest the same year. The band is also the subject of a series of comic books by Mario Boon from the studio Dupuis.

History
Junior Eurovision Song Contest
In the national qualifying rounds for the Junior Eurovision Song Contest in Belgium, X!NK competed against nine other contestants: Laura, Martijn, Remi, Kia, Jelly Pie, Simon MC, the twin girls Tonya and Charlotte. X!NK beat, Tonya the second place winner with a difference of 3 points.

The band then represented Belgium at the first Junior Eurovision Song Contest on 15 November 2003 with the song "De Vriendschapsband" (The Bond/Band Between/Of Friends). The song, which they wrote themselves, is about the origin of their band and their friendship. In the field of 16 contestants, they ended in sixth place with 83 points at the final in Copenhagen, Denmark. The first place was for Dino representing Croatia and the second place for Sergio from Spain with a song dedicated to his mother who died some months before the contest.

Like the other contestants they got to record their entry in a studio with a professional producer, in their case Paul Despiegelaere. Their winning song was released as a single.

After the Junior Eurovision Song Contest
X!NK launched their second single, named "Oh-Ho" in the beginning of 2004. Later that year their first album, containing twelve songs was released. The album went gold in Flanders (the Dutch language area of Belgium).

X!NK often perform at rock festivals in Belgium (for example Marktrock in Leuven). In 2004, they released the song "Laat Me Vrij" (Let Me Free) which served as the theme song for the film Garfield in Flemish cinemas. For the sequel to Ice Age, Ice Age: The Meltdown which debuted in Flemish cinemas on 31 March 2006, they recorded the song "De Andere Kant" (The Other Side) which served as the theme song for this film. Lead singer Jonas also provided the Dutch voice for the character Jimmy the Anteater in the film. 

Their second album Vergif (Poison) was released on 30 September 2005.
They also performed on the big 0110-event in Belgium. They opened the show in Ghent.

Recently Niels and Thomas also play in another Belgian band called The Crackups with two other musicians.

Discography
AlbumsTitleTranslationRelease date (in Belgium)NotesX!NKX!NK20 September 2004 Self-titled debut album.VergifPoison29 September 2005 Second album

SinglesTitleTranslationRelease date (in Belgium)Notes"De Vriendschapsband"The Band of Friends6 October 2003Single of winning Junior Eurovision Song Contest entry."Oh-Ho"Oh-Ho9 February 2004"Laat Mij Vrij"Let Me Free12 July 2004Theme song for Garfield: The Movie"Sorry"Sorry8 November 2004"Denk Aan Mij"Think About Me20 August 2005"Hou Ons Niet Tegen"Don't Stop Us2 December 2005"De Andere Kant"The Other Side17 February 2006Theme song for Ice Age: The Meltdown"Give Us a future"Give Us a futureOctober–December 2007Theme song for Junior Eurosong 2007

Trivia
* Jonas was born in 1989, Niels and Thomas in 1991 and Philip in 1993.
* The band members are all fans of Janez Detd which had an influence on their music.

