Haystack Rock is a 235-foot (72-meter) sea stack in Cannon Beach, Oregon. It is sometimes claimed locally to be the third-tallest such "intertidal" (meaning it can be reached by land) structure in the world, but there are no official references to support this. A popular tourist destination, the monolithic rock is adjacent to the beach and accessible by foot at low tide. The Haystack Rock tide pools are home to many intertidal animals, including starfish, sea anemone, crabs, chitons, limpets, and sea slugs. The rock is also a nesting site for many sea birds, including terns and puffins.

Location and management
Haystack Rock is located about south of downtown Cannon Beach in Clatsop County and about west of Portland. The nearest major road is U.S. Route 101. Haystack Rock is part of the Tolovana Beach State Recreation Site. The area below the mean high water (MHW) level is managed by Oregon Parks and Recreation. The area above the MHW level is managed by the Oregon Islands National Wildlife Refuge of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.

Other Haystack Rocks

There are at least six several other geographic features in Oregon named Haystack Rock including two others along the Oregon Coast—and either others throughout the U.S. The tallest and probably best known due to its proximity to Portland is in Tillamook County located off Pacific City and near Cape Kiwanda. It stands above the sea and is the fourth tallest sea stack or off-shore monolith in the world.

The other Oregon coastal Haystack Rock stands above sea level in Coos County near Bandon.

Haystack Rock in Cannon Beach is accompanied by several smaller rocks known as The Needles.
 name !! type !! elevation !! coordinate !! USGS map !! GNIS ID Haystack Rock (Aleutians West (CA) County, Alaska) Island Seguam C-6 Haystack Rock (Aleutians East County, Alaska) Island False Pass B-3 Haystack Rock (Arizona) Summit Chaiyahi Flat Haystack Rock (Larimer County, Colorado) Pillar Cherokee Park Haystack Rock (Moffat County, Colorado) Pillar Haystack Rock Haystack Rocks (Indiana) Summit Williams Haystack Rock (Kentucky) Pillar Slade Haystack Rock (Coos County, Oregon) Island Bandon Haystack Rock (Clatsop County, Oregon) Island Tillamook Head Haystack Rock (Lake County, Oregon) Summit Gearhart Mountain Haystack Rock (Malheur County, Oregon) Summit Grassy Mountain Haystack Rock (Tillamook County, Oregon) Island Nestucca Bay Haystack Rock (Wallowa County, Oregon) Summit Table Mountain Haystack Rock Arch Arch Nestucca Bay Haystack Rock (Washington) Pillar Cliffdell 

Geology
Composed of basalt, Haystack Rock was formed by lava flows emanating from the Grand Ronde Mountains 10 to 17 million years ago. The lava flows created many of the Oregon coast's natural features, including Tillamook Head, Arch Cape, and Saddle Mountain. Haystack Rock was once joined to the coastline but years of erosion have since separated the monolith from the coast. Three smaller, adjacent rock formations to the south of Haystack Rock are collectively called "The Needles".

Ecology
Haystack Rock was granted Marine Garden status by the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife in 1990. Collecting plants or animals is strictly prohibited. Climbing above the mean high tide level (barnacle line) disturbs nesting birds and is not allowed. The Haystack Rock Awareness Program is a volunteer association which conducts educational seminars at the rock during low tide between May and September.

Recreation

Visitors to Haystack Rock can view many species of marine wildlife in their natural habitat during low tide. The thin strip of rock and sand that connects it to the beach at these times features many tide pools. The area surrounding the rock is popular for picnicking, kite-flying, and bird-watching. Artists and photographers can be found capturing the beauty of Haystack Rock on canvas or on film.

Haystack Rock is one of the most identifiable geological formations of Oregon. Many people each year become temporarily trapped on Haystack Rock when high tide engulfs the rock in water, necessitating rescue by the United States Coast Guard or local authorities. Oregon's beaches are publicly owned, and there are several hotels along the beachfront within walking distance of Haystack Rock, making the area congested with tourists during the summer.

Popular culture
* Haystack Rock can be seen prominently in the 1971 film of Oregonian Ken Kesey's novel, Sometimes a Great Notion during the scene where the Stampers brawl with the union workers.
* Haystack Rock can be seen in the opening scene of The Goonies, when the Fratellis are fleeing from the police and then enter a race on the beach. It can be seen in the background. Later in the film you can see the Haystack Rock again when Mikey is pointing out some rocks in the distance.
* Haystack Rock can also be seen in the 1979 movie 1941, directed by Steven Spielberg. The rock is particularly out of place, as the setting is supposed to be the California coast.
* Haystack Rock can be seen in the movie Kindergarten Cop, during the carnival scene later in the movie.
* Haystack Rock was on the June 26 2013 Bing Homepage.
* Haystack Rock is one of the feature Desktop pictures shipped with Windows 7. The picture can be found in the "United States" theme.

