Lecrae Devaughn Moore (born October 9, 1979), mononymously known as Lecrae, is an American Christian rapper, songwriter, record producer and actor. He is the president, co-owner and co-founder of the independent record label Reach Records, and the co-founder and president of the non-profit organization ReachLife Ministries. To date, he has released seven studio albums and two mixtapes as a solo artist, and has released three studio albums, a remix album, and one EP as the leader of the rap group 116 Clique. He produced much of his earlier material along with other early Reach Records releases.

Moore debuted with Real Talk in 2004 through Reach Records. His third solo album, Rebel, released in 2008, became the first Christian hip-hop album to reach No. 1 on the Billboard Gospel chart. Rehab followed in 2010, and Moore began attracting mainstream attention when he performed at the 2011 BET Hip Hop Awards Cypher and appeared on the Statik Selektah song "Live and Let Live" from Population Control. On May 10, 2012, Moore released his first mixtape, Church Clothes, which was hosted by DJ Don Cannon. Considered his breakthrough into mainstream hip-hop, the mixtape was downloaded over 100,000 times in less than 48 hours. His sixth studio album, Gravity, came out on September 4, 2012, and it along with Church Clothes have been called the most important albums in Christian hip hop history. The album debuted as the number one bestselling album on the overall iTunes chart, No. 3 on the Billboard 200 and won the Grammy Award for Best Gospel Album at the 2013 Grammy Awards, marking the first time that a Christian hip hop artist received this award. On November 7, 2013, Moore released his second mixtape, Church Clothes 2. Lecrae's seventh album, Anomaly, was released on September 9, 2014. It debuted at No. 1 on the Billboard 200 with 88,587 copies sold through the first week, the first album to top both the 200 and the Gospel chart simultaneously.

Moore received nominations for Artist of the Year at the 43rd, 44th, and 45th GMA Dove Awards, and for Best Gospel Artist at the 2013 BET Awards. His work has received five Grammy Award nominations (one of which he won and three of which are pending), one Billboard Music Award nomination, fourteen Dove Award nominations, four of which he won, four Stellar Award nominations, one of which he won, and a Soul Train Music Award and BET Hip Hop Awards nomination. Moore's filmography include a role in the television film A Cross to Bear and a brief role as Dr. Malmquist in the comedy film Believe Me, released September 26, 2014. In the social sphere, Moore has advocated for the preservation of responsibility and fatherhood as a value among men in the United States, and in 2013 partnered with Dwyane Wade and Joshua DuBois in the multimedia initiative This Is Fatherhood as part of the Obama administration's Fatherhood and Mentoring Initiative.

Life and career

Early life
Born and raised by his single mother in Southern Houston, Texas, Moore moved often early in life, living in San Diego, Denver, and Dallas. He remembers going to church with his Christian grandmother, but said that it was for "older people" and "wasn't for me." Lecrae never met his father, who ended up becoming a drug addict. In the song "Good, Bad, Ugly", Moore reveals that when he was almost eight, a female baby sitter sexually molested him, an incident which Moore believes distorted his view of sexuality, influencing his later promiscuous lifestyle. Experiencing abuse and neglect during his childhood, Moore used his ability to rap as a source of significance. According to Moore, his grandmother would not allow him to watch rap music videos on television, but he would sneak in late at night. It was in these videos that Moore found individuals to look up to. Moore states that "there were no Martin Luther Kings or Malcolm Xs, they had all passed away so I had Tupac." After being shown a gun by his uncle, Moore began looking up to gangsters and turned to a life of crime. Moore remembers taking a bb gun and standing in the street pointing it to a car, frightening the female driver, simply for fun. At the age of 16, he started taking drugs, fighting, was arrested in high school for stealing, and eventually ended up on a gang list. Moore tried "pretty much every drug there was to try" except for heroin and crack cocaine.

According to CNN, he became a drug dealer and used the Bible that his grandmother gave him as a good luck charm. After being arrested for drug possession, the officer saw the Bible and let Moore go on a promise that he would agree to live by it. He eventually turned from drugs to alcohol consumption and a party lifestyle and became a "misfit of a person." He has described himself during this period as a thrill-seeker, he would pull stunts such as jumping from a third-story building, and gained the nickname "Crazy 'Crae". Encouraged by his concerned mother to read his Bible, Moore said that "I remember ripping the pages out of the Bible and throwing it on the floor. I don't want this Bible. I couldn't wrap my hands around this being true or real." He began to drink and smoke more and look for more women "as the emptiness became more profound." At age 17, his personal, financial, and relationship troubles convinced him that he was at a "dead end." Wanting to do the "mature thing," the influence of his grandmother gave him a desire to attend church. A girl Moore attended high school with was there, and she invited him to a Bible study, where he met his future wife. Moore was surprised to find that the members of the Bible study "were just people like me. They read the same books and listened to the same music. Their character was just different. They were loving and that's really what drew me in." Moore says that it was "right after high school" at age 19 that he finally decided to live for God, though "it wasn't overnight" and he "spent a lot of time making bad decisions."

Conversion
Lecrae attended a conference after being invited by a friend, though Moore admits that his interest was to meet girls and experience the big city. When he arrived at the conference, Moore was awed by the performance of the Christian hip-hop group The Cross Movement. Lecrae says that he saw "guys who had been shot from being in gangs, girls who were extremely promiscuous in the past, I see rappers, dancers and singers; I see people who came from the same background I came from, and they still embodied who they were culturally, but they were all in love with Jesus and I had never seen that before." After hearing Pastor James White of Christ Our King Community Church speak on how Christians are bought with a price and the suffering that Jesus underwent in the Crucifixion, Moore says that he remembers articulating "God get me out of this, don't kill me; do whatever you have to do to get me out of this, just don't kill me." Later, Moore was driving on a highway when he turned too quickly and his car went into a roll. He had no seatbelt and the roof and windshield of the car caved in, his glasses were molded into the frame of the car, but he survived completely uninjured. This incident finally convinced him to commit his life to Christ. Moore went back to his college, the University of North Texas, with a printed version of his testimony to pass out on campus. He started volunteering and performing at a juvenile detention center, and the reception he received convinced him that offering "hope and encouragement" through music was what he wanted to do. However, Moore still struggled in his faith − as revealed in "Good, Bad, Ugly", in 2002 he impregnated a then-girlfriend. Rather than risk scandal, he and his girlfriend had the baby aborted, a decision he now deeply regrets.

2004–07: Early career, Real Talk, and After the Music Stops
Five years after his conversion, Moore teamed up with Ben Washer to found Reach Records, and at the age of 25 he released his first album, Real Talk. The following year it was re-released by Cross Movement Records and reached No. 29 on the Billboard Gospel Albums chart, staying on the chart for 12 weeks. The album later received a nomination at the 2007 Stellar Awards. In 2005, Moore co-founded the non-profit organization ReachLife Ministries, which equips local Christian leaders with tools, media, curriculum, and conferences that are based on the teachings of the Bible and relevant to hip-hop culture. Also in 2005, the debut album of 116 Clique, The Compilation Album, was released.

After the success of Real Talk, Moore released his second studio album on August 15, 2006. After the Music Stops charted at No. 5 on the Billboard Gospel Albums chart, No. 7 on the Billboard Christian Albums chart and No. 16 on the Billboard Heatseeker Album charts, and received a nomination for a Dove Award, as was the single "Jesus Muzik", featuring Trip Lee. In 2007, 116 Clique released its second album, 13 Letters, reaching No. 10 on the Gospel Albums chart and No. 29 on the Christian Albums chart. 116 Clique also released the remix EP Amped, which peaked at No. 24 on the Gospel Albums chart.

2008–09:Rebel
On October 8, 2008, Moore's third album, Rebel, entered the Billboard charts at No. 60 with 9,800 units sold and topped the Billboard Gospel Album charts for two weeks, the first hip-hop album to do so. It also charted at No. 2 on the Christian Albums chart and No. 15 on the Top Independent charts. In 2009, the album received a nomination at the 40th Dove Awards, as did the Flame song "Joyful Noise", which featured Lecrae and John Reilly. 2009 also saw Moore's first film role, when he appeared in the documentary Uprise Presents: Word from the Street by the UK-based TV channel OHTV.

2010–11: Rehab series
On February 5, 2010, Moore released a charity single entitled "Far Away", a tribute to the victims of the devastating 2010 Haiti earthquake. Moore promised that all proceeds from the single's sales would go directly to the Haiti relief effort. A music video for the song premiered five days later.

On July 7, Moore announced on the Reach Records website that the title of his new album would be Rehab. On August 5, 2010, Rapzilla released a new song from Moore called "Amp It Up". Moore subsequently clarified on his Twitter account that the song was not a single from Rehab, but rather a theme song for Kanakuk Kamps, a chain of Christian camps for which he writes songs annually. On August 31, 2010, Reach Records revealed the tracklist for Rehab, released it for preorder, and premiered a promotional video "Idols". A second promotional video, entitled "I Am Dust", debuted on September 9, 2010. Upon its release, Rehab hit No. 16 on the Billboard 200 chart, making it one of the highest selling Christian hip hop albums at that time.

On September 22, 2010, Rapzilla reported that the Rehab packaging came with an advertisement encouraging buyers to purchase another upcoming album, Rehab: The Overdose, which saw release on January 11, 2011. It included 11 new songs and featured several other Christian artists such as Thi'sl and Swoope. Rehab: The Overdose debuted at No. 15 on the Billboard 200. On August 29, 2011, Moore announced through Twitter that on September 27, 2011, he would release a special edition of Rehab, entitled Rehab: Deluxe Edition. On the same day, 116 Clique released their fourth album, entitled Man Up.

On September 7, 2011, Rapzilla announced that Moore would be featured on the BET Hip Hop Awards Cypher on October 11, 2011. Moore gained popularity after his verse on the cypher, trended nationwide on Twitter, and was featured on AllHipHop. Moore then appeared as a feature on Statik Selektah's song "Live and Let Live" from his Population Control album.

2012–2013: Mainstream breakthrough, Gravity, and Church Clothes series
On February 16, 2012, Rapzilla announced that Moore was preparing to release his first mixtape, Church Clothes. On May 3, 2012, Moore premiered his music video for the title-track of his Church Clothes mixtape online on XXL. The video was noted for including cameos by Kendrick Lamar and DJ Premier, and attracted almost 20,000 views in less than a day. Hosted by Don Cannon, the mixtape featured the song Darkest Hour, in which Lecrae collaborated with No Malice of Clipse. Church Clothes was downloaded more than 100,000 times in less than 48 hours on DatPiff.com, and in less than a month reached 250,000 downloads, a platinum rating on Datpiff.com. On June 25, 2012, a remastered version of the mixtape, without DJ Don Cannon, was released as an EP for sale on iTunes. Due to issues with sampling, this version was much shorter with only seven songs. Upon its release, the EP debuted on the Billboard charts at No. 10 on both the Christian Albums and Gospel Albums charts for the week of July 14, 2012.

On April 27, Moore announced that his next album, Gravity, was to be released in late 2012, and recording sessions began in May. On June 21, 2012 Moore appeared live at the Apple Store in Chicago for Black Music Month. The release date for Gravity, September 4, 2012, as well as the album artwork was announced on July 19, 2012 via Rapzilla.

On August 30, 2012, the rapper Saigon announced that Lecrae would be one of the featured artists on his upcoming album The Greatest Story Never Told Chapter 2: Bread and Circuses, due November 6, 2012.

Gravity was released on September 4, 2012 to critical acclaim. Upon its release, Gravity debuted at No. 3 on the Billboard 200, with 72,000 units sold. The album also debuted at No. 1 on the Christian, Gospel, Independent, and Rap Album charts, No. 3 on the Digital Albums chart, and 24 on the Canadian Albums Chart. After the iTunes deluxe version of the album hit No. 1 on that vendors charts, and the regular version at number No. 2, Time wrote an article about Lecrae and his success with the album.

On November 7, 2013, Lecrae released his second mixtape, entitled Church Clothes Vol. 2, hosted once again by Don Cannon. The mixtape debuted at No. 21 on the Billboard 200, No. 1 on the Billboard Christian Albums and Gospel Albums charts, and No. 3 on the Rap Albums chart. On Datpiff.com, the album was download over 146,000 times by November 26, 2013.

2014–present: Anomaly

On June 3, 2014 Lecrae announced through social media that his seventh studio album will be titled Anomaly. The album released on September 9, 2014. It is supported by the single "Nuthin". It debuted at No. 1 on the Billboard 200 with over 88,000 copies sold through the first week. It is the first time an album tops both the Billboard 200 and the Gospel Albums chart. Lecrae also became the fifth artist following Chris Tomlin (2013), TobyMac (2012), LeAnn Rimes (1997) and Bob Carlisle (1997) to score a number one album on both Christian Albums and the Billboard 200. Anomaly also marks the sixth time that Lecrae topped the Gospel Albums chart and the fifth time he topped the Christian Albums chart. In its second week of sales, the album sold 31,000 copies, bringing the total to 120,000 copies sold. In its third week of sales, the album sold another 17,000 copies, bringing the total to 137,000 copies. As a reward to fans for their support in helping his album go No. 1 on Billboard, Lecrae released a new song, "Non-Fiction", as a free download on September 17. The song was subsequently released on October 21, 2014 in the iTunes store.

Influences and musical style
Moore's musical genre is predominantly Southern hip hop, and has been described as falling under the styles of crunk, gangsta rap, and hardcore hip hop. On his third release, Rebel, Moore slowed down his style on many songs. Rehab was noted for its stylistic diversity, particularly on the song "Children of the Light", which featured Dillavou and Sonny Sandoval and incorporated rock, reggae, and reggaeton influences. With the release Gravity, Billboard described Moore as incorporating reggae and soul influences into his "signature brash sound."

Regarding which musical artists have influenced him, Moore, in an interview with Essence, cited Tupac, Nas, DJ Quik, Scarface, and The Cross Movement. In an interview with The Christian Post, Moore listed his top favorite five hip-hop artists as Tupac, Nas, The Ambassador, Snoop Dogg, and, though for his business approach rather than his music, Jay-Z. Moore also names Outkast and Lauryn Hill as major influences, particularly their albums Aquemini and The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill, respectively, and considers Hill's song "Adam Lives in Theory" as the top song that nourishes him spiritually. In the song "Non-Fiction", he lists the Tunnel Rats alongside The Cross Movement as an influence when he was newly converted to Christianity. Theologically, Moore follows the Reformed tradition of theology and is considered an influential figure in the New Calvinist movement. He cites Tommy Nelson, John MacArthur, and John Piper, among others, as early influences on his Christian faith, and Moore even titled one of his hit songs, "Don't Waste Your Life", after the book of the same name by Piper. Moore explains that through Nelson, MacArthur, and Piper, he subsequently discovered Spurgeon, Calvin, and Francis Schaeffer, the last of whom Moore calls his "personal hero". Other theologians cited by Lecrae include Tim Keller, Andy Crouch, Randy Alcorn, and Abraham Kuyper. He also looks to Martin Luther King, Jr. for inspiration on working out faith in social issues.

He frequently tells the press that "My music is not Christian, Lecrae is." He told Miami New Times's Crossfade that "I think Christian is a wonderful noun, but a terrible adjective. Are there Christian shoes, Christian clothes, Christian plumbers, Christian pipes? I think if you're going to, you should label it hip-hop.. hip-hop is a particular poetic style. Labeling it with the faith assumes that the song is going to be some kind of sermon, but there's a lot of social and political things that I don't think make it gospel or Christian music." He also stated, "I like to wrap my mind around a total situation. I'm a social anthropologist. If I never been homeless, let me try to be homeless for a week and soak up that information. More like a method actor. So for me it's spending time with people and talking about things from their perspective."

Popular culture
Los Angeles Lakers guard Jeremy Lin recommended Lecrae and Hillsong in an interview when asked about his pre-game music. NFL quarterback Tim Tebow and professional wrestler Ezekiel Jackson have also endorsed Lecrae. During March 2014, Lecrae signed a ten-day contract with the Atlanta Hawks, and on April 4, 2014, he performed live at Philips Arena after the Hawks game. "Dum Dum," a song by Tedashii featuring Lecrae, was used on an episode of So You Think You Can Dance.

Social activism
In 2011, 116 Clique and ReachLife Ministries, both headed by Moore, launched a media campaign entitled Man Up, intended to mentor male urban youths on fatherhood and biblical manhood. It features concert tours and a curriculum centered on a short film and a studio album, both titled Man Up, and since 2012 has also featured a string of conference events.

In May 2013, Moore partnered with NBA player Dwyane Wade, filmmaker Art Hooker, and Joshua DuBois, the former head of the Office of Faith Based and Neighborhood Partnerships under the Obama administration, to create the national media campaign This Is Fatherhood, an initiative "devoted to restoring America's commitment to healthy fatherhood." The campaign began on May 1 with a "This is Fatherhood Challenge", in which contestants could submit videos, songs, and essays about fatherhood through June 10. The winners received cash prizes and a trip to Washington, D.C., for a ceremony on Father's Day. In addition, Moore offered studio time and mentoring to the grand prize winner. Moore, Wade, DuBois, Jay-Z, and U.S. President Barack Obama all made appearances in the campaign's promotional public service announcements.

Personal life
Moore currently resides in Atlanta since relocating there from Houston in 2009. He is married to Darragh Moore and has three children. Darragh handles the administration for Moore's tours. Lecrae is a graduate of University of North Texas. In an interview with Hip Hop DX, Lecrae stated that Clipse member No Malice sought him out as a spiritual advisor.

Discography

* Real Talk (2004)
* After the Music Stops (2006)
* Rebel (2008)
* Rehab (2010)
* Rehab: The Overdose (2011)
* Gravity (2012)
*Anomaly (2014)

Production discography

2004
'

2005
'
*With So Hot Productions and C.I.

2006
'
*With So Hot Productions, Mac the Doulous, DJ Official, and Tony Stone

'
*With DJ Official, Tony Stone, Mac the Doulous, So Hot Productions

'
*Executive producer with Ben Washer
"
 
"
 
"

2007
'
*With Bobby Taylor, DJ Official, BenJah, and So Hot Productions

2008
'
"

2012
'
*Executive producer

2014

*Executive producer

Filmography Year Title Role Notes 2009 Uprise Presents: Word from the Street Himself TV documentary special2011Man UpKing Short film by 116 Clique 2012A Cross to BearJeromeTelevision filmWelcome to the Family Documentary HimselfShort documentary web film by R.M.G. 2013 Everything Must Go Short documentary web film by Andy Mineo The Cross Short documentary web film by Billy Graham 2014 Believe Me Dr. Malmquist Comedy movie

Awards

BET Award nominations

BET Awards
 2013 Lecrae Best Gospel Artist 


BET Hip Hop Awards
 2014 "Nuthin'" BET Award for Best Impact Track 


Billboard Music Award nominations
 2013 Gravity Top Christian Album 


GMA Dove Award nominations
 2007 After the Music Stops Rap/Hip Hop Album of the Year "Jesus Muzik" (featuring Trip Lee) Rap/Hip Hop Recorded Song of the Year 2009 Rebel Rap/Hip Hop Album of the Year "Joyful Noise" (Flame featuring Lecrae and John Reilly) Rap/Hip Hop Recorded Song of the Year 2011 Rehab Rap/Hip Hop Album of the Year "Background" (featuring C-Lite) Rap/Hip Hop Recorded Song of the Year 2012 Lecrae Artist of the Year Rehab: The Overdose Rap/Hip Hop Album of the Year "Hallelujah" Rap/Hip Hop Recorded Song of the Year "Overdose" Rap/Hip Hop Recorded Song of the Year 2013 Lecrae Artist of the Year Gravity Rap/Hip Hop Album of the Year "Tell the World" (featuring Mali Music) Rap/Hip Hop Recorded Song of the Year "I'm Good" (Trip Lee featuring Lecrae) Rap/Hip Hop Recorded Song of the Year 2014 Lecrae Artist of the Year "Help" (Erica Campbell featuring Lecrae) Gospel Performance of the Year "Dear Mr. Christian" (Derek Minor featuring Dee-1 and Lecrae) Rap/Hip Hop Recorded Song of the Year 


Grammy Awards
 2011 Rehab Best Rock Gospel Album 2013 Gravity Best Gospel Album 2015 "All I Need Is You" Best Rap Performance "Messengers" (featuring For King & Country) Best Contemporary Christian Music Performance/Song "Help" (Erica Campbell featuring Lecrae) Best Gospel Performance/Song 


Stellar Award nominations
 2007 Real Talk Rap/Hip Hop Gospel CD of the Year 2010 Rebel Rap, Hip Hop Gospel CD of the Year 2012 Rehab Rap, Hip Hop Gospel CD of the Year Rehab: The Overdose Rap, Hip Hop Gospel CD of the Year 2014 Gravity Rap, Hip Hop Gospel CD of the Year 


Soul Train Music Award nominations
 2013 "Confessions" Best Gospel/Inspirational Performance 2014 "Help" (Erica Campbell featuring Lecrae) Best Gospel/Inspirational Song 


