Queens High School for the Sciences at York College (commonly called QHSSYC or just QHSS) is a New York City public high school that specializes in mathematics and science. It admits students based on their scores on the Specialized High Schools Admissions Test. 

The school was formed in 2002 along with the High School for Math, Science and Engineering at City College and the High School of American Studies at Lehman College. Originally, there were three specialized high schools: Brooklyn Technical High School, Bronx High School of Science, and Stuyvesant High School. It continued to grow each year as a new class entered, reaching its present size in 2005, when the fourth class was admitted. There are now about 400 students.

In 2012, U.S. News & World Report published QHSSYC as the 52nd best "Gold Medal" high school in the United States, and the 8th best "Gold Medal" high school in New York. The school is operated by the New York City Department of Education. It consistently ranks among the best schools in New York City in graduation rate, Regents test scores, and attendance. In its most recent progress report, the New York City Department of Education assigned it the highest possible grade of "A".

QHSSYC is a member of the National Consortium for Specialized Secondary Schools of Mathematics, Science and Technology (NCSSSMST).

Academics

The school collaborates with York College in an agreement that allows the high school students to use college facilities such as the library, cafeteria, and gymnasium. It is housed on the second floor of the college's science building.

Queens High School for the Sciences places an emphasis on the sciences and mathematics as part of its college-preparatory curriculum. It is not uncommon for students to be one or two years advanced in mathematics or science. Most students finish all of the required high-school mathematics courses at the end of their sophomore or even freshman year. Often before graduating, students have already taken college-level classes including calculus, some of them even have enough college credit to skip the first year of college.The specialized curriculum provided by the school helps students pursue potential careers in medicine or other fields of science.

Mentorships and internships assist students in developing research projects, and research advisers help them in science, mathematics and technology fairs and symposia throughout the U.S. 

The curriculum is Regents-based. The passing percentages on the New York State Regents exams are among the highest in the state.

As a New York City Department of Education high school, QHSSYC requires 44 credits to graduate with a New York State Regents diploma. Requirements for the Advanced Regents Diploma are set by New York State.

QHSSYC has one of the highest attendance rates of high schools in New York City.

 History 

In June 2006, founding Principal Brian Jetter retired, and Jie Zhang took his place. In June 2011, Principal Jie Zhang was promoted to Stuyvesant High School, and Dr. David Marmor took her place. Dr. Marmor left after the 2012-13 school year and the position is currently held by Leneen Gibson as Acting Principal.

