Misericordia University is a four-year, Catholic, co-educational liberal arts university located on a campus in Dallas, Pennsylvania, near the cities of Wilkes-Barre and Scranton. It was founded by the Religious Sisters of Mercy on August 15, 1924. The university offers bachelor's, master's and doctoral degrees as well as post-master's and post-bachelor's certificates.

On August 24, 2007 Misericordia achieved university status. It was called College Misericordia prior to August 24, 2007.

History
The Religious Sisters of Mercy were of the order of Mercy founded in Dublin in 1831. The Sisters vowed to be of service to the impoverished, sick and uneducated. The Sisters of Mercy came to the Wyoming Valley area of Pennsylvania in 1875, continuing their mission of praying, teaching and caring for the sick. The sisters established a school for children and a night school for adults in the coal mining region.

On August 15, 1924, the Sisters of Mercy established Luzerne County’s first four-year institution of higher learning, Misericordia, on nearly of land in Dallas, Pennsylvania, purchased by the Sisters for this purpose in 1914.

More than 2,500 people witnessed the dedication of Misericordia (whose name means “heart of mercy”). That September, 37 students began their studies.

Misericordia continues to be as a university, a broad-based liberal arts and pre-professional studies institution offering education to those of all faiths. The university has been co-educational since the 1970s and offers graduate programs. Today, Misericordia University is located on the original grounds, but has expanded to , situated in a suburban setting eight miles (13 km) from downtown Wilkes-Barre.

University Status
Prior to August 24, 2007, Misericordia operated as "College Misericordia." The process to determine whether or not to become a university began in August 2005 with the introduction of the concept to faculty, staff and students.

A University Status Task Force was formed with representatives from alumni, current students, the Board of Trustees, and the faculty and staff to provide a recommendation to the Board of Trustees. The task force recommended to the Board of Trustees on June 9, 2006 that the college make application to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of Education (PDE) to pursue university status.

The PDE Visitation Team conducted a site visit at Misericordia in January 2007 and submitted a written response in March 2007 to our application (submitted 2006).

Final approval was received on August 15, 2007 and institution began operations as Misericordia University on August 24, 2007.

Campus
Recently (2009–2013), numerous changes have been added to the campus:
* The Shakespeare Garden Misericordia University features the only Shakespeare Garden in northeast PA and won a 2011 Greening Award from the Pennsylvania Horticulture Society 

* Pauly Friedman Art Gallery 
* The College of Health Sciences - Passan Hall
* Insalaco Hall 

* Metz Field House 
* MacDowell Hall 

Academics
Misericordia gives students a choice of 34 majors in three Academic Colleges:
* College of Arts and Science
* College of Health Sciences
* College of Professional Studies and Social Sciences

Guaranteed Placement Program
Misericordia's Guaranteed Placement Program (or GPP) is a development program pertaining to a student’s education.

Established in 1999, the GPP assists students entering the workforce or graduate school after graduation. Students participate in the GPP for all four years of their college experience. If they do not receive a job offer or are not accepted into graduate/professional school within six months of graduation, the university gives them a paid internship in their chosen field.

BA to MA in English
Launched in September 2014, the Misericordia University/University of Reading BA to MA in English is a five-year program in which students complete a four-year Bachelor of Arts degree in English at Misericordia and a one-year Master of Arts degree in English Language and Literature at the University of Reading in the United Kingdom. Students may study for an MA in Children’s Literature or English, including pathways in Renaissance studies, Victorian Literature and Culture, or Modern and Contemporary Writing. 

Athletics
Misericordia University competes in the NCAA Division III, Eastern College Athletic Conference and the Freedom Conference within the Middle Atlantic Conferences. Women's sports include basketball, soccer, field hockey, volleyball, swimming, softball, cross-country, cheerleading, lacrosse, tennis and track and field. Men's sports include basketball, football, soccer, swimming, cross-country, baseball, golf, lacrosse, tennis and track and field.

The school has had an athletics program since 1932, when it introduced intramural sports.

Student life
41 clubs, service organizations and special interest organizations.

Special Organizations: Assistive Technology Research Institute; Diversity Institute; Ethics Institute of Northeast Pennsylvania; Institute of Gerontology (Aging Religious); Institute of Law and Religious Life; Institute of Sacred Scripture.

Special Programs: Alternative Learner's Project (ALP) for students who learn differently; Center for Service Learning; incorporating community service into academic study; Distance Learning Program, providing college level courses to students in the Northern Tier of Pennsylvania; Fun and Fitness Program, providing a variety of athletics and other activities for the community at the Anderson Sports-Health Center; Cultural Events, providing a variety of programs usually at no cost to the community.

Freshmen Year Experience
Misericordia offers a first-year program for students new to the institution that integrates them into the university community. Through an introductory session at orientation and six weekly follow up classroom workshops during the fall semester, all first year students become familiar with key offices, services, and resources on campus and explore issues related to university life such as diversity, wellness, thinking, learning, peer pressure, and drugs and alcohol. During the spring semester, all first year students participate in another FYE program devoted to leadership development. Students work with their facilitators and classmates to assess their leadership potential on and off campus.

Student Government Association
Misericordia's Student Government Association is a student-run, student-elected executive board which represents the students at Misericordia University. Members of the board and delegates represent the students on various college committees. Student Government also is the governing body of the various clubs on campus and keeps records of each club's activities.

Student Media

Communications Department

The Highlander is a student written newspaper published bi-weekly during the semester. To read and subscribe to the Highlander online - www.highlandernews.net/ CLICK HERE

CougarRadio is a student-operated radio station that streams over the Internet. To listen live - www.cougarradio.net CLICK HERE

Munson Center Network (MCN 87) is a student run TV station that airs on the campus closed circuit network. All programming is provided by the Communications Department. To view MCN 87 online - www.vimeo.com/mucom CLICK HERE

English Department

Instress is the campus' annual literary magazine published each spring. It prints original material by students and members of the university community.

Notable alumni
The university's notable alumni include:
* Karen Boback, member of the Pennsylvania House of Representatives
* Dave Kern, professional soccer player
* Maria Pallante, United States Register of Copyrights

Financial aid
The University participates in financial aid programs. These programs generate funds from Federal, State and College resources. Additional financial aid monies are contributed by alumni and friends of the University. The financial aid office packages aid from a combination of sources to meet indicated need.

