The Queen Elizabeth Islands are the northernmost cluster of islands in the Canadian Arctic Archipelago, split between Nunavut and Northwest Territories in Northern Canada. The Queen Elizabeth Islands contain approximately 14% of the global glacier and ice cap area.

Geography
The islands, together in area, were renamed as a group after Elizabeth II on her coronation as Queen of Canada in 1953. Most are uninhabited although the NRCan’s Climate Change Geoscience Program Earth Sciences Sector (ESS), has monitors on the islands. In 1969 Panarctic Oils, now part of Suncor began operating exploration oil wells in the Sverdrup and Franklinian basins and planned on establishing its resource base in the Queen Elizabeth Islands. It ceased production in the 1970s. At the 2013 GeoConvention the Arctic Islands region were called Canada’s perpetual "last petroleum exploration frontier". Hogg and Enachescu argued that the development and implementation of advanced marine and land seismic technologies in Alaska, Northern Europe and Siberia could be modified for use in the Queen Elizabeth Islands. 

First sighted by Europeans in 1616, the Queen Elizabeth Islands were not fully explored and charted until the British Northwest Passage expeditions and later Norwegian exploration of the 19th century.

These islands were known as the Parry Archipelago for over 130 years. They were first named after British Arctic explorer Sir William Parry, who sailed there in 1820, aboard the Hecla. Since the renaming of the archipelago in 1953, the term Parry Islands continued to be used for its southwestern part (less Ellesmere Island and Sverdrup Islands). The regional break down of the archipelago is therefore as follows:
*Ellesmere Island
*Sverdrup Islands
*Parry Islands

Ellesmere Island is the northernmost and by far the largest. The Sverdrup Islands are located west of Ellesmere Island and north of Norwegian Bay. The remaining islands further south and west, but north of Lancaster Sound, Viscount Melville Sound and McClure Strait have been carrying the name Parry Islands, which name until 1953 had also included the Sverdrup Islands and Ellesmere Island. South of Lancaster Sound, Viscount Melville Sound and McClure Strait are the remaining islands of the Canadian Arctic Archipelago.

Major islands
Many of the islands are among the largest in the world, the largest being Ellesmere Island. Other major islands include Amund Ringnes Island, Axel Heiberg Island, Bathurst Island, Borden Island, Cornwall Island, Cornwallis Island, Devon Island, Eglinton Island, Ellef Ringnes Island, Mackenzie King Island, Melville Island, and Prince Patrick Island.

Smaller islands
Other smaller but notable islands include; Beechey Island , which held the graves of Petty Officer John Torrington, Royal Marine Private William Braine, and Able Seaman John Hartnell, three members of Sir John Franklin's crew, Hans Island , a small, uninhabited barren knoll measuring whose ownership is disputed by Canada and Denmark, the Cheyne Islands , three small islands that are Important Bird Area (#NU049) and a Key Migratory Bird Terrestrial Habitat site (NU site 5) and Skraeling Island an important archaeological site where Inuit (Dorset, Thule) and Norse artifacts have been found. They consist of Silurian and Carboniferous rocks covered with tundra.

Population
With a population of less than 400, the islands are nearly uninhabited. There are only three permanently inhabited places in the islands. The two municipalities are the hamlets of Resolute (population 229 as of the 2006 census), on Cornwallis Island, and Grise Fiord (population 141 as of the 2006 census), on Ellesmere Island. Alert with a population of 5 as of the 2006 census is an Environment Canada weather station, a Global Atmosphere Watch (GAW) atmosphere monitoring laboratory on Ellesmere Island, has several temporary inhabitants due to the co-located CFS Alert. Eureka, a small research base on Ellesmere Island, has a population of zero but at least 8 staff on a continuous rotational basis.

Only seasonally occupied are Camp Hazen on Ellesmere Island, McGill Arctic Research Station on Axel Heiberg Island, and Flashline Mars Arctic Research Station on Devon Island.

Formerly manned stations were Mould Bay on Prince Patrick Island, Isachsen on Ellef Ringnes Island, and Fort Conger on Ellesmere Island.

Abandoned settlements are Dundas Harbour on Devon Island and Craig Harbour on Ellesmere Island.

 Administration 
Until 1999, the Queen Elizabeth Islands were part of the Baffin Region of the Northwest Territories.

With the creation of the Nunavut in 1999 all islands and fractions of islands of the archipelago east of the 110th meridian west became part of Qikiqtaaluk Region of the new territory, which was the major portion of the archipelago. The rest remained with the now-reduced Northwest Territories. Borden Island, Mackenzie King Island and Melville Island were divided between the two territories.

Prince Patrick Island, Eglinton Island and Emerald Island are the only notable islands that are now completely part of the Northwest Territories.

Below the level of the territory, there is the municipal level of administration. On that level, there are only two municipalities, Resolute and Grise Fiord, with an aggregate area of (0.11 percent of the area of the Queen Elizabeth Islands), but with most of the population of the archipelago (370 out of 375). The remaining 99.09 percent are unincorporated area, with a census 2006 population of five, all in Alert.

 Overview of the islands 
According to the Atlas of Canada there are 34 larger and 2,092 smaller islands in the archipelago. With the exception of Ellesmere Island, they fall into two groups, the Sverdrup Islands and the Parry Islands:
Island sub-group Territory Peak Heightm Heightft Areakm² Areasq mi RankCanada RankWorld Coordinates Alexander Parry NU average elevationalign"right" align"right" 66   Amund Ringnes Sverdrup NU ridgealign"right" align"right" 25 111 Axel Heiberg Sverdrup NU Outlook Peakalign"right" align"right" 7 32 Baillie-Hamilton Island Parry NU  align"right" align"right" 91   Bathurst Parry NU Stokes Mountainalign"right" align"right" 13 54 Borden Parry NU/NT  align"right" align"right" 30 170 Brock Parry NT  align"right" align"right" 58 383 Buckingham Island Parry NU Mount Windsoralign"right" align"right" 137   Byam Martin Parry NU  align"right" align"right" 42 294 Cameron Parry NU Mount Wilmot     align"right" 46 312 Coburg Island Parry NU  align"right" align"right" 83   Cornwall Sverdrup NU McLeod Peakalign"right" align"right" 31 184 Cornwallis Parry NU  align"right" align"right" 21 96 Devon Parry NU Devon Ice Capalign"right" align"right" 6 27 Eglinton Parry NT  align"right" align"right" 36 249 Ellef Ringnes Sverdrup NU Isachsen Domealign"right" align"right" 16 69 Ellesmere NU Barbeau Peakalign"right" align"right" 3 10 Emerald Isle Parry NT  align"right" align"right" 63 466 Graham Sverdrup NU  align"right" align"right" 38 265 Griffith Island Parry NU      align"right" 110   Helena Island Parry NU average in southern hillsalign"right" align"right" 85   Hoved Island Parry NU      align"right" 125   Île Vanier Parry NU  align"right" align"right" 44 298 King Christian Sverdrup NU King Christian Mountainalign"right" align"right" 60 420 Little Cornwallis Island Parry NU      align"right" 75   Lougheed Parry NU  align"right" align"right" 41 273 Lowther Island Parry NU raised beachalign"right" align"right" 133   Mackenzie King Parry NU/NT Castel Buttealign"right" align"right" 26 115 Massey Parry NU  align"right" align"right" 71   Meighen Sverdrup NU  align"right" align"right" 50 337 Melville Parry NU/NT  align"right" align"right" 8 33 North Kent Parry NU  align"right" align"right" 62 453 Prince Patrick Parry NT  align"right" align"right" 14 55 Stor Island Sverdrup NU  align"right" align"right" 87   remaining 2,092 islands NU/NT align"right" ... ... Queen Elizabeth   NU/NT Barbeau Peak align"right" align="right" ... ... 

 Glaciers and ice caps 
 
The Queen Elizabeth Islands contain four glaciers that represent c.14% of all glaciers and ice caps in the world. According to a 2011 report, the largest of the four, the Devon Ice Cap measured (northwest sector only); the Meighen Ice Cap measured ; the Melville South Ice Cap measured and the White Glacier, Axel Heiberg Island glacier was . The size of these glaciers has been measured since 1961 and their results published in such distinguished journals as the International Glaciological Society's Annals of Glaciology. Of the four ice caps that the federal government's NRCan’s Climate Change Geoscience Program Earth Sciences Sector (ESS), monitors onsite in the Canadian High Arctic, three are in the Queen Elizabeth Islands: Devon, Meighen and Melville. In a memo to Earth Sciences Sector (ESS) in Canada’s High Arctic indicates that shrinking of ice caps started in the late 1980s, and has accelerated rapidly since 2005,” says an October 2013 memo to NRCan’s deputy minister, who reports to federal Natural Resources Minister Joe Oliver.

Computer analysis of a glacier inventory of Axel Heiberg Island was undertaken in the 1960s. Later inventories of the World Glacier Monitoring Service under the direction of Fritz Müller, who worked on glacier inventories internationally, included the Axel Heiberg Island glacier.

