XHRM-FM (Magic 92.5) is an English-language Rhythmic adult contemporary radio station serving the areas of Tijuana, Baja California, Mexico and San Diego, California, United States. Licensed to Tijuana, the station broadcasts at 92.5 MHz on the FM Radio band. XHRM is owned by Communicacion Xersa of Mexico, and is one of three Tijuana/San Diego stations programmed by Local Media San Diego LLC . The station's studios are in San Diego's Sorrento Valley district.

History
92.5 FM debuted in February 1979 as San Diego's first Urban contemporary FM station, featuring soul, rap, and gospel music. Although owned by a Mexican company (as required by Mexican law), it was programmed by a U.S. company. At the time, it was the only San Diego station managed by blacks and programmed specifically for the black community.

XHRM became one of the first stations in the U.S. to regularly play Freestyle songs as a part of their playlist. The combination of Latin-based Freestyle songs along with the station's original mainstream R&B sound was a success and was the station's signature for the decade.

In late 1989, the Mexican owners ordered the then General Manager to cease operating the station for non-payment of licensing fees. The station then changed to "Power 92-5", playing soft rock and dance music (in essence, a Rhythmic Top 40) and whose flip predated another station that would later flip to the same format in April 1990, XHITZ, who would become XHRM's sister station.

By May 1990, XHRM returned to their Urban direction and rebilled itself as "Hot 92.5." But by then, XHTZ had already made inroads by luring listeners to their station. XHRM later suffered a tragic setback when the station owner died in a plane crash that same year. On June 28, 1993, the format changed to Modern rock, as "92.5 The Flash". In January 1998, due to low ratings, the station shifted towards a AAA format, branded as "Independent Radio 92/5ive", though this resulted in lower ratings. On September 13, 1998, at 7 PM (after XETRA-FM became its sister station), KMCG ("Magic 95-7") and its R&B format were moved to the 92.5 frequency and would evolve to a Rhythmic Oldies format under program director Rick Thomas. An on-air slogan, "San Diego's Old School", highlighted the oldies aspect of the programming.

By late 2009, a San Diego company, Finest City Broadcasting, was the programming operator of not only XHRM, but also two other Mexican-licensed stations, XHITZ and XETRA-FM. In January 2010, Local Media of America acquired most of the assets of Finest City Broadcasting, including these programming rights. Local Media of America changed their name to Local Media San Diego LLC in February, 2011.

In September 2011, XHRM promoted one of its on-air personalities, Todd Himaka, to music director. In following months, the station began leaning towards Rhythmic AC. This followed Z90.3, Channel 933, and Q96 all tweaking their formats in the Contemporary hit music direction, away from Mainstream Top 40/Dance Top 40, mostly to compete with KEGY. In December 2012, XHRM picked up new competition in the form of KSSX, which ironically happens to reside at the 95.7 frequency that was the previous home of XHRM's current format. 

Current
On January 10, 2013, the station changed its slogan to "The Beat of San Diego." On the same date, the station introduced a new logo. Currently, the station's playlist consists of classic soul and R&B from the late 1960s to the 1990s (with occasional tracks from the 2000s), disco and classic dance tracks from the late 1960s to the early 1990s, some old school hip-hop and new wave tracks, and no current songs. 

In a nod to their previous Rhythmic Oldies format and "San Diego's Old School" slogan, XHRM still carries an "Old School Block Party" program on Saturday nights.

