Candice S. Miller (born May 7, 1954) is the U.S. Representative for , serving since 2003. She is a member of the Republican Party.

The district includes all of Michigan's Huron, Lapeer, Sanilac, and St. Clair counties, plus northern Macomb and eastern Tuscola counties. She is one of only a few members in Congress whose highest level of education is a high school diploma.

U.S. House of Representatives

Committee assignments
*Committee on Homeland Security
**Subcommittee on Border and Maritime Security (Chairman)
*Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure
**Subcommittee on Highways and Transit
**Subcommittee on Railroads, Pipelines, and Hazardous Materials
**Subcommittee on Water Resources and Environment
*United States House Committee on Administration (Chairman)

Caucus memberships
*Congressional Boating Caucus (Co-Chair) Waterways Caucus
*International Conservation Caucus
*Jobs Now Caucus (Co-Chair)
*Sportsmen's Caucus
*Congressional Caucus on Macedonia and Macedonian Americans (Co-Chair)

For the 110th Congress Miller was appointed to continue her service on the House Armed Services Committee and was added to the Transportation and Infrastructure Committee, which has jurisdiction over not only surface transportation but also water quality issues related to the Great Lakes. Miller was appointed to the House Committee on Homeland Security in March 2008 and has since left the House Armed Services Committee.
During the 108th Congress, the House Ethics Committee sent her letters of admonishment for having improperly attempted to influence the vote of fellow Michigan congressman Nick Smith on the House floor. She later told the Detroit Free Press, " can be intimidated by an overweight middle-age woman, that's too bad."

During the 2003 Invasion of Iraq, Mrs. Miller was a member of the Armed Services committee, and part of a "war room" team that relayed information from the Bush administration to Republican members, the news media, and the public.

Admonishment by House Ethics Committee

During the 108th Congress, Miller was admonished by the House Ethics Committee for improperly attempting to
influence the vote of fellow Michigan Congressman Nick Smith on a Medicare vote.
"The subcommittee released a 62-page report... that admonished Rep. Candice Miller (R-Mich.) and House
Majority Leader Tom DeLay (R-Texas) for possibly breaking House rules by offering support for Smith's son in
exchange for a vote and threatening retaliation if Smith did not vote for the Medicare bill.

The report... admonished Rep. Candice S. Miller (R-Mich.) for making comments about Brad Smith during the
Nov 22 roll call that appeared to be "a threat of retaliation" for Nick Smith's vote against the bill.

Representative Miller told the Investigative Subcommittee that the first time she spoke to Representative
Smith about his vote on the Medicare legislation was on the House floor while the vote was open, after
Representative Smith had cast his vote. She estimated that she spoke with him during the first hour of the
time that the vote was held open. Representative Miller saw Representative Smith’s no vote on the board and
she ‘‘didn’t like the way that he voted.’’ Representative Miller testified that, on her own initiative, she
approached Representative Smith and said words to the effect of: ‘‘Is this how you’re going to vote; or, This
is how you’re going to vote? And he said, Obviously.’’

Representative Miller recalled that she responded by saying words to the effect of: ‘‘Well, I hope your son
doesn’t come to Congress, or I’m not going to support your son, or something to that effect.’’ Representative
Smith then ‘‘rose up out of his seat and said, You get out of here.’’ That was the end of the interaction
between the two Members. Representative Miller estimated that the exchange lasted for about ten seconds. She
told the Investigative Subcommittee that she did not at any point ask Representative Smith to change his vote
on the Medicare legislation.

Representative Smith told the Investigative Subcommittee that Representative Miller specifically threatened to work against his son if he did not change his vote. Representative Smith’s recollection was that Representative Miller ‘‘came up and said something like, I haven’t been involved in this campaign before, but if you don’t change your vote, I’ll get involved, and I’ll make sure Brad isn’t elected.’’

Political positions
Miller is a signer of Grover Norquist's Taxpayer Protection Pledge, which commits her to oppose tax increases.

Miller sat on the House Select Committee on Energy Independence and Global Warming and has praised President Obama for his stance on off-shore oil exploration. She supports selling oil and gas leases to help fund the research and development of alternative energy projects.

On August 31, 2011, Miller complained about the publication by WikiLeaks (a non-profit document archive organisation) of classified documents purloined from the U. S. Government, “The latest release of stolen American secrets by the organization WikiLeaks once again proves that they are a terrorist operation that puts the lives of Americans and our allies at risk. Particularly contemptible and criminal is the release of the identities of sources of information to our nation from those working against despotic regimes or terrorist organizations. WikiLeaks can no longer say that they are anything more than an organization that aids and abets enemies of freedom. It is long past time for the Obama Administration to take decisive action to shut this criminal operation down and to bring those who steal and release America’s secrets and put our allies at risk to justice.”

On April 26, 2012, Miller voted for the controversial Cyber Intelligence Sharing and Protection Act. It passed the House of Representatives, but did not become law.

Sponsored legislation
In June 2013, Miller introduced legislation, the Great Lakes Navigation System Sustainability Act of 2013 , to redefine how the Great Lakes are treated in the competition for United States government harbor maintenance funding, and to create the opportunity for recreational harbors to vie for federal funding as well.

Miller, along with Congresswoman Loretta Sanchez, introduced , the Biometric Exit Improvement Act of 2013. The bill would implement a biometric exit system that would monitor the exit of foreign visitors. The bill would require the Secretary of Homeland Security to implement a biometric exit system for ten airports and ten seaports, test the system for two years, and then implement the system nationwide.

Miller also introduced, on November 14, 2013, , To amend the Federal Election Campaign Act to extend through 2018 the authority of the Federal Election Commission to impose civil money penalties on the basis of a schedule of penalties established and published by the Commission, to expand such authority to certain other violations, and for other purposes. The bill would allow the FEC to continue to use a fee schedule to impose small fines on things such as late filings.

On January 10, 2014, Miller introduced the United States Customs and Border Protection Authorization Act (H.R. 3846; 113th Congress), a bill that would authorize the Customs and Border Protection (CBP) and its mission and direct the CBP in the United States Department of Homeland Security to establish standard procedures for addressing complaints made against CBP employees and to enhance training for CBP officers and agents. Miller said that "Today, the House passed legislation that provides the necessary statutory authorization that will protect the agency's mission by providing our officers and agents proper authorities to carry out their important work."

Opposed legislation
The bill Homeowner Flood Insurance Affordability Act of 2013 (H.R. 3370; 113th Congress) passed in the House on March 4, 2014. The bill delayed indefinitely some of the reforms to the deeply indebted National Flood Insurance Program. The primary issue what the premiums should be on home and business owners located in flood zones. Miller opposed the bill and argued that the state of Michigan should opt out of the National Flood Insurance Program entirely and urged the governor to do so. According to Miller, Michigan residents subsidize other, more flood prone parts of the country, by paying higher premiums than they should. Miller accused insurance premiums of being decides by politics rather than actuarial costs. She said that "too many Americans across this nation are paying rates far below what actual risk would dictate in the marketplace while others, including many who I represent, are being forced to pay into a program that they do not need or want to help subsidize lower rates for other favored groups whose risk is far greater."

Political campaigns

1994
Miller was elected Michigan Secretary of State, unseating 6-term incumbent Richard H. Austin. She was the first Republican to serve as Secretary of State in Michigan in 40 years since Owen Cleary left office in 1955.

1998
Miller carried every county in Michigan (including Wayne County, home to Detroit) and beat both Democrat Mary Parks and Reform Party's Perry Spencer by 1 million votes, the largest margin of victory for a candidate running statewide in Michigan.

2002
After the 2000 United States Census, the Michigan Legislature reconfigured the state's congressional map. In the process, they redrew the 10th District, represented by 13-term Democrat David Bonior. The old 10th had been a fairly compact district taking in most of Macomb and St. Clair counties. However, the reconfigured 10th was pushed all the way to the Thumb. In the process, the legislature moved Miller's home in Harrison Township into the district, while shifting Bonior's home in Mount Clemens to the neighboring 12th District. Bonior opted to run for the governor of Michigan rather than run for re-election to the House of Representatives. Miller won the Republican primary, and in the general election in November she handily beat Carl Marlinga, the Macomb County Prosecutor since 1982. Marlinga called himself a "Hubert Humphrey Democrat", and Miller called herself a "George W. Bush Republican." She outraised Marlinga, and secured the Teamsters Union (but not AFL-CIO) endorsement.

2006
Miller faced no opposition in the Republican primary, and was acclaimed as the Republican candidate on August 8, 2006. In the general election Miller was challenged by Democrat Robert Denison and three third-party candidates. Miller defeated Denison 178,843 to 84,574 votes.

2008

Miller was reelected against Democratic candidate Robert Denison, Libertarian candidate Neil Kiernan Stephenson, and Green candidate Candace Caveny.

During the 2008 Presidential election, Miller endorsed Former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani for president. At the Michigan Republican convention, she explained, "When deciding what candidate I wanted to be our next President of the United States I knew we needed someone who would continue the fight against terrorism, who has proven leadership and who has the record and experience of managing government and improving the economy. Again and again on the most important issues facing America I came to the same conclusion, that former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani is the man we need to lead our nation."

Miller spoke on behalf of Senator John McCain and was a vocal supporter of Governor Sarah Palin. She was a member of Gov. Palin's "truth squad" leading up to the 2008 presidential election.

2010

Miller was challenged by Democratic nominee Henry Yanez, a Sterling Heights firefighter and paramedic. He is currently the Chairman of the 10th District Democrats and was a delegate to the 2004 and 2008 Democratic National Conventions. Miller won reelection November 3, 2010 with nearly 72% of the vote, beating Yanez, two minor party candidates, and a write-in.

2012

Mrs. Miller's choice for Chairman of Michigan's 10th congressional district Republican committee lost to her former assistant secretary of state, Stanley Grot, a local Tea Party activist. Grot is chairman of the district committee, clerk of Shelby Township, and formerly a constituent relations representative in the Michigan Attorney General's office. He has been president of the American Polish Cultural Center.
After Henry Yanez dropped out to run for a State Representative position, two candidates, Jerome Quinn and Chuck Stalder, have declared and will face each other in a primary set for August 7, 2012 to decide who will have the Democratic nomination, and be facing Mrs. Miller in the 2012 general election.

Personal life
Miller's husband Donald Miller is a retired Circuit Court judge in the 16th Circuit Court for Macomb County. He was a fighter pilot, flew combat missions in Vietnam, commanded the Selfridge Air National Guard Base and retired from the Air National Guard as a Colonel. Their daughter is a member of the United Auto Workers Union.

