Project Censored is a media research, education, and advocacy initiative housed at Sonoma State University since 1976. Project Censored was founded by Professor Carl Jensen to expose censorship in propaganda and mass media. Jensen named Professor Peter Phillips his successor, who then enlisted professors Mickey Huff and Andy Lee Roth. They have expanded Project Censorship to approximately two dozen university and college campuses across the United States, which is now the current size. Among its journalistic activities is the publication of news stories omitted or censored by other media sources.

Published works
Since 1993 Project Censored has published an annual trade paperback review of the “Top 25 Censored Stories of the Year”. Features of the book include Junk Food News, comic strips by Tom Tomorrow, updates on previous top stories, essays, and interviews. The publisher is Seven Stories Press in New York. Other projects include For the Record, a weekly radio program featuring underpublished stories, hosted by Pat Thurston.

Top Censored Stories and Media Analysis of 2013-2014
#Ocean Acidification Increasing at Unprecedented Rate
#Top Ten US Aid Recipients All Practice Torture
#WikiLeaks Revelations on Trans-Pacific Partnership Ignored by Corporate Media
#Corporate Internet Providers Threaten Net Neutrality
#Bankers Back on Wall Street Despite Major Crimes
#The Deep State: Government "without Reference to the Consent of the Governed"
#FBI Dismisses Murder Plot against Occupy Leaders as NSA and Big Business Crack Down on Dissent
#Corporate News Ignored Connections between Extreme Weather and Global Warming
#US Media Hypocrisy in Covering Ukraine Crisis
#World Health Organization Suppresses Report on Iraqi Cancers and Birth Defects
#Wealthy Donors and Corporations Set Think Tanks' Agendas
#Pentagon Awash in Money Despite Serious Audit Problems
#Lawsuit Challenged Nuclear Power Industry Immunity from Liability in Nuclear Accidents
#Accumulating Evidence of Ongoing Wireless Technology Health Hazards
#Reporting Miscarriages, Criminalizing Pregnant women's Bodies
#The Beef Industry's "Feedlot Feedback Loop"
#2016 Will Find Gaza out of Drinking Water
#National Database of Police Killings Aims for Accountability
#Agribusiness Giants Attempt to Silence and Discredit Scientists Whose Research Reveals Herbicides' Health Threats
#Estonia a Global Example of E-Government, Digital Freedom, Privacy, and Security
#Questioning the Charter School Hype
#Corporate News Media Understate Rape, Sexual Violence
#Number of US Prison Inmates Serving Life Sentences Hits New Record
#Restorative Justice Turns Violent School Around
#"Chaptered Out": US Military Seeks to Balance Budget on Backs of Disabled Veterans

Reception
Walter Cronkite said that "Project Censored is one of the organizations that we should listen to, to be assured that our newspapers and our broadcasting outlets are practicing thorough and ethical journalism".

The founder of the progressive news analysis and commentary website AlterNet criticized Project Censored as "stuck in the past" with a "dubious selection process" that "reinforces self-marginalizing, defeatist behavior". It has also been criticized for reporting on stories which are arguably not "under-reported" or "censored" at all, as they have sometimes appeared in the New York Times and other high-profile publications.

Some of these claims come from other progressive publications, such as AlterNet, Mother Jones, and New Politics that are concerned that the Project's mis-reporting will give the progressive movement and its alternative media less credibility. For example, Project Censored has been criticized for consistently downplaying Serbian atrocities in Bosnia and Kosovo, for exaggerating the dangers of the Cassini-Huygens space probe to Saturn, and for giving support to 9/11 conspiracy theories.

Professor Robert Jensen and journalist Norman Solomon resigned from Project Censored's panel of national judges over the decision to highlight the 9/11 conspiracy theories of Steven E. Jones, a founder of Scholars for 9/11 Truth, in Censored 2007.

In a debate with Project Censored's Associate Director Mark Lowenthal, Jack Shafer wrote that Project Censored had "an overbearing left-wing bias -- a fact belied by its refusal to review stories from the right-wing or conservative press, the openly partisan nature of the stories that are selected and the leftist panel of judges who help select them."

List of winners of Project Censored awards
*Joel Bleifuss
*Lisa Gale Garrigues, 2004
*Dave Lindorff, 2004
*Rock Creek Free Press, 2008

