Nicholas Meyer (born December 24, 1945) is an American screenwriter, producer, author and director, most known for his best-selling novel The Seven-Per-Cent Solution, and for directing the films Time After Time, two of the Star Trek feature film series, and the 1983 television movie The Day After.

For adapting a screenplay from his own novel for The Seven-Per-Cent Solution (1976), Meyer was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay. He has also been nominated for a Satellite Award, three Emmy Awards, and has won four Saturn Awards.

Early life, education and career
Meyer was born into a Jewish family. His father was a Manhattan psychoanalyst and his mother a concert pianist. Meyer graduated from the University of Iowa with a degree in theater and filmmaking, and also wrote film reviews for the campus newspaper.
Meyer first gained public attention for his best-selling 1974 Sherlock Holmes novel The Seven-Per-Cent Solution, a story of Holmes confronting his cocaine addiction with the help of Sigmund Freud. Meyer followed this with two additional Holmes novels: The West End Horror (1976), and then The Canary Trainer (1993).

The Seven-Per-Cent Solution was later adapted as a 1976 film of the same name, for which Meyer wrote the screenplay. The film was directed by Herbert Ross and starred Nicol Williamson, Robert Duvall, Alan Arkin and Laurence Olivier. For his work adapting the novel, Meyer was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay at the 49th Academy Awards.

Intrigued by the first part of college friend Karl Alexander's then-incomplete novel Time After Time, Meyer optioned the book and adapted it into a screenplay. He consented to sell the script only if he were attached as director. The deal was optioned by Warner Bros., and the film became Meyer's directorial debut. Meyer freely allowed Alexander to borrow from the screenplay. The latter published his novel at about the same time the movie was released.

Time After Time (1979) starred Malcolm McDowell, Mary Steenburgen and David Warner. It was a success with both critical reception and in box office returns.

At the behest of then Paramount executive Karen Moore, Meyer was hired to direct Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan.

Meyer later directed the 1983 television film The Day After, starring Jason Robards, JoBeth Williams, John Cullum, Bibi Besch, John Lithgow and Steve Guttenberg, which depicted the ramifications of a nuclear attack on the United States. Meyer had originally decided not to do any television work, but changed his mind upon reading the script by Edward Hume. For his work on The Day After, Meyer was nominated for an Emmy Award for Best Director. Afterward, he also directed "The Pied Piper of Hamelin", a 1985 episode of the television series Shelley Duvall's Faerie Tale Theatre.

He resumed directing theatrical films with the 1985 comedy Volunteers, starring Tom Hanks and John Candy. After directing Volunteers, Meyer returned to working on Star Trek, co-writing the screenplay for Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home (1986) with producer Harve Bennett. Meyer's next directing job was the 1988 Merchant Ivory produced drama The Deceivers, with Pierce Brosnan as British officer William Savage. Meyer later wrote and directed the 1991 spy comedy Company Business, starring Gene Hackman and Mikhail Baryshnikov as aging American and Russian secret agents. In 1991, Meyer once again returned to the world of Star Trek, co-writing and directing Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country, which became a swan song for the original cast. Meyer performed uncredited rewrites on an early draft of the screenplay of the 1997 James Bond film Tomorrow Never Dies.

Meyer adapted the Philip Roth novel The Human Stain for the 2003 film of the same name. In 2006, he teamed with Martin Scorsese to write the screenplay for Scorsese's adaptation of Edmund Morris's Pulitzer Prize winning biography of Theodore Roosevelt, The Rise of Theodore Roosevelt. The story traces Roosevelt's early life.

Star Trek films
Meyer, along with writer/producer Harve Bennett, is one of two people credited with revitalizing and perhaps saving the Star Trek franchise after the problems of the first film, Star Trek: The Motion Picture, almost caused Paramount Pictures to end the series. Paramount had been unhappy with the creative direction of the first film, as well as the cost overruns and production problems. However, the film was also a great financial success, and they wanted a sequel. Bennett, a reliable television producer, was hired to help.

Introduced to Bennett by Paramount executive Karen Moore, Meyer was hired as a potential director for Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan despite never having seen the first film. Due to problems with the early drafts of the script, which most readers disliked, Meyer quickly became involved in re-writing the film's screenplay. After meeting with Bennett and other members of the cast and crew regarding the script, Meyer impressed Star Treks actors and producers by delivering a superior draft of the script in only twelve days. The draft had to be completed so quickly, in fact, that Meyer agreed to forgo the negotiation of a contract or credit for his writing in order to begin work on the script immediately. As a result, he is uncredited as a writer on the final film.

In his direction, Meyer made stylistic alterations, such as adding more of a naval appearance. Meyer and Bennett together created a film that was engaging while also reducing costs and avoiding the production fiascoes of the first Star Trek. The Wrath of Khan became a financial success, grossing $78 million in the domestic market, and is considered by many to be the best Star Trek film to date.

Although he "refused to specialize" and so vowed to not work on another Star Trek project, Meyer co-wrote the screenplay for the fourth Star Trek film, Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home with Bennett. For that film, Bennett wrote the first and fourth acts, which occur in the 23rd century, and Meyer wrote the second and third acts, which occur in 1986 San Francisco. Meyer has said that one of the most enjoyable aspects of working on this film was getting the chance to re-use elements which he had been forced to discard from his earlier film, Time After Time. Star Trek IV proved to be successful financially, notable for succeeding with general moviegoers as well as science fiction and Star Trek devotees.

Meyer worked for the Star Trek franchise again for the sixth film in the series, Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country (1991). He developed the story with Leonard Nimoy and co-wrote the screenplay with long-time friend and assistant Denny Flinn. He directed the picture, which was the final film to feature the entire classic Star Trek cast. Like its predecessors, this film was successful financially, grossing $74 million in the domestic market.

Filmography Year Title Job Notes 1973 Invasion of the Bee Girls Writer 1974 Judge Dee and the Monastery Murders Writer (screenplay) TV film 1975 The Night That Panicked America Writer (screenplay) TV film Nominated — Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Miniseries, Movie or a Dramatic Special 1976 The Seven-Per-Cent Solution Writer (novel/screenplay) Nominated — Academy Award for Best Adapted ScreenplayNominated — WGA Award for Best Drama Adapted from Another Medium 1979 Time After Time Director/Writer (screenplay) Avoriaz Fantastic Film Festival Antenne II AwardAvoriaz Fantastic Film Festival Grand PrizeSaturn Award for Best WritingNominated — Edgar Allan Poe Award for Best Motion Picture ScreenplayNominated — Hugo Award for Best Dramatic PresentationNominated — Saturn Award for Best DirectionNominated — Saturn Award for Best Science Fiction Film 1982 Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan Director/Writer (screenplay – uncredited) Saturn Award for Best DirectionNominated — Hugo Award for Best Dramatic PresentationNominated — Saturn Award for Best Science Fiction Film 1983 The Day After Director TV filmGolden Screen AwardNominated — Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing in a Limited Series or a SpecialNominated — Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Drama/Comedy Special 1985 Faerie Tale Theatre Director/Writer (screenplay) TV series, episode "The Pied Piper of Hamelin" Volunteers Director 1986 Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home Writer (screenplay) Nominated — Saturn Award for Best Writing 1987 Fatal Attraction Writer (uncredited) 1988 The Deceivers Director 1991 Company Business Director/Writer Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country Director/Writer (screenplay) Saturn Award for Best Science Fiction FilmNominated — Hugo Award for Best Dramatic PresentationNominated — Saturn Award for Best Writing 1993 Sommersby Writer Spur Award for Best Motion Picture Script 1995 Voices Writer 1997 The Informant Writer (screenplay)/Executive Producer TV filmWon — PEN Center USA West Literary Awards for Best Teleplay The Odyssey Executive Producer TV miniseriesNominated — Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding MiniseriesTomorrow Never Dies Writer (screenplay — uncredited) 1999 Vendetta Director TV film1999The Prince of Egypt Writer (screenplay alongside Phillip LaZebnik, based on the Book of Exodus) 2002 Fall from the Sky Writer TV film Collateral Damage Executive Producer 2003 The Human Stain Writer (screenplay) 2006 Orpheus Writer/Executive Producer TV film 2008 Elegy Writer (screenplay) Nominated — Satellite Award for Best Adapted Screenplay 2009 The Hessen Affair Writer 2014 Houdini Writer TV miniseries

Bibliography Year !! Title !! Notes 1970 The Love Story Story Non-fiction 1974 Target Practice The Seven-Per-Cent Solution Publishers Weeklys bestselling novels of 1974The New York Times Best Seller list. 1976 The West End Horror The New York Times Best Seller list. 1978 Black Orchid Co-Wrote with Barry J. Kaplan 1981 Confessions of a Homing Pigeon 1993 The Canary Trainer 2009 The View From the Bridge: Memories of Star Trek and a Life in Hollywood Non-fiction

Awards and nominations Award Year Project Category Outcome Academy Awards 1976 The Seven-Per-Cent Solution Best Adapted Screenplay Emmy Awards 1975 The Night That Panicked America Outstanding Writing for a Miniseries, Movie or a Dramatic Special 1983 The Day After Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing in a Limited Series or a Special Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Drama/Comedy Special 1997 The Odyssey Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Miniseries Satellite Awards 2008 Elegy Best Adapted Screenplay Saturn Awards 1979 Time After Time Best Science Fiction Film Best Director Best Writing 1982 Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan Best Director Saturn Award for Best Science Fiction Film 1984 The George Pal Memorial Award 1986 Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home Best Writing 1991 Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country Best Science Fiction Film Best Writing Spur Awards 1993 Sommersby Best Drama Script 

