Narberth is a town in Pembrokeshire, Wales. (Population 2,150, of which a third are Welsh-speaking). It was founded around a Welsh court, but later became a Norman stronghold on the Landsker Line. It became the headquarters of the hundred of Narberth. It was once a marcher borough. George Owen described it in 1603 as one of nine Pembrokeshire "boroughs in decay".

Location and description
Narberth is a mile south of the A40 trunk road (on the A478) and benefits from a railway station on the line to Tenby and Pembroke.

The town plays a high-profile role in Welsh mythology, where it is the chief palace of Pwyll, Prince of Dyfed, and a key setting in both the first and third branches of the Mabinogi. A drama specially adapted for children based on the story of Culhwch and Olwen from the Mabinogion was staged at Narberth Castle when it was reopened to the public in 2005. Its most famous son is possibly Sir Thomas Foley. 

Facilities and attractions
Attractions in the town include several art galleries, the Narberth Museum, the former town hall which still houses the cell where the leaders of the Rebecca Riots were imprisoned and a ruined castle. Narberth is well known for its range of independent shops, including a Daily Telegraph sponsored 'Best Traditional Business', national award-winning butcher, women's boutiques, gift shops and has developed a reputation as an antiques center.

Other attractions near to Narberth include Blackpool Mill, at the highest tidal reach of the River Cleddau, where otters and other wildlife may be seen and Oakwood Theme Park. 

The town's cultural and arts centre, the Queen's Hall, has recently played host to live bands such as Therapy?, The Blockheads, The Automatic, Sonic Boom Six, Skindred, Send More Paramedics, Pendulum and Enter Shikari. Concerts, plays and many classes, such as Kung Fu, yoga and line dancing are held there and it boasts a contemporary art gallery on the top floor as well as a restaurant on the ground floor.

The Bloomfield House Community Centre, a Community association and a registered charity is located in Narberth.

 Twin town 

Narberth is twinned with the English town of Ludlow, and both towns celebrate an annual food festival.

 Sport 

Narberth is home to several sporting teams, including Narberth RFC who currently play in the Welsh Championship, Narberth Football Club, and a Cricket club.

 Events 

Narberth Food Festival takes place on the fourth weekend of September every year. It is a not for profit event run by volunteers. On Friday 100 local primary school children are invited to an education day where they take part in food-related activities. On the Saturday and Sunday there are stallholders selling food, drinks and cookware as well as talks, entertainment and children's activities. 

Narberth Civic Week is held during the last full week of July and includes a parade through the town to one of the Churches, where a service is held to welcome the newly appointed Mayor. In 2008, the Civic Service was held in the grounds of Narberth Castle for the first time. During Civic Week, there are various activities arranged for children, families and visitors to the town. The culmination of Civic Week is the annual Carnival Day Parade, a tradition dating back over 100 years. Narberth's Winter Carnival, held in December, was revived in 2009, after a break of 4 years.

The town is also home to the Narberth A Cappella Voice Festival, which is now (2015) in its seventh year.

Gallery

 

