The Rwenzori Mountains, previously called the Ruwenzori Range (spelling changed c. 1980 to conform more closely with the local name "Rwenjura"), and sometimes the Mountains of the Moon, is a mountain range of eastern Equatorial Africa, located on the border between Uganda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Rwenzori mountains support glaciers and are the source of the Nile river.

The Rwenzori Mountains reach heights up to 5,109 m (16,761 ft) at . The highest Rwenzori peaks are permanently snow-capped, and along with Mount Kilimanjaro and Mount Kenya are the only such ones in Equatorial Africa. Rwenzori Mountains National Park and Virunga National Park are located in the range.

 Geology 
The mountains formed about three million years ago in the late Pliocene, as a result of an uplifted block of crystalline rocks including: gneiss, amphibolite granite, and quartzite.
They are on the flanks of the Albertine Rift, the western branch of the East African Rift.

This uplift divided the paleolake Obweruka and created three of the present-day African Great Lakes: Lake Albert, Lake Edward,
and Lake George.

The range is about 120 km (75 mi) long and 65 km (40 mi) wide. It consists of six massifs separated by deep gorges: Mount Stanley (5,109m), Mount Speke (4,890m), Mount Baker (4,843m), Mount Emin (4,798m), Mount Gessi (4,715m) and Mount Luigi di Savoia (4,627m). Mount Stanley is the largest and has several subsidiary summits, with Margherita Peak being the highest point. The rock is metamorphic, and the mountains are believed to have been tilted and squeezed upwards by plate movement. They are in an extremely humid area, and frequently enveloped in clouds.

 Human history 
In 150 CE the Alexandrian Greek geographer Ptolemy referred to a snowcapped massif in the heart of Africa by the name of Selenes oros, Latinized as "Lunae Montes", in English Mountains of the Moon. These are now widely accepted to be the Rwenzori Mountains.


The first modern European sighting of the Rwenzori was by the expedition of Henry Morton Stanley in 1889 (the clouds possibly being the reason two decades of previous explorers had not seen them). On June 7, the expedition's second-in-command and its military commander, William Grant Stairs, climbed to , the first known non-African ever to climb in the range. John Edmund Sharrock Moore reached the snowline in 1900, attaining 14,900 feet and proved the existence of permanent glaciers. The first ascent to the summit was made by the Duke of the Abruzzi in 1906. His expedition quickly made first ascents of all major snow and ice peaks, mapping their complex geography, and leaving them with Italian names. His team consisted of mountain guides, biologists, surveyors, a geologist, photographers, and some one hundred and fifty porters. Photographer Vittorio Sella took a number of photographs showing a now-vanished world. Sella's photographic work is conserved at the Museo Nazionale della Montagna, in Torino, and at the Istituto di Fotografia Alpina Vittorio Sella, in Biella, both in Italy. The Makerere University, Uganda, also has a selection of his images.

The Rwenzori range is the home of the Konjo and Amba peoples. In the early 1900s, these two tribes were added to the Toro Kingdom by the colonial powers. The Konjo and Amba began to agitate for separation from Toro in the 1950s, a movement that became Rwenzururu, an armed secessionist movement, by the mid-1960s. The insurgency ended through a negotiated settlement in 1982, though the Rwenzururu Kingdom was acknowledged by the government in 2008.

Natural history

Flora

Although the flora in the Rwenzori is closely related to that of other East-African high mountains it is much more luxuriant here. This is mainly a result of the high and regular rainfall in the area. The distribution of vegetation is for a good deal determined by the altitude. At higher elevations, certain genera of plants grow unusually large. Most surprising are the giant heathers, senecios and lobelias, to which the Swedish botanist Olov Hedberg from the Uppsala University referred to as “botanical big game”. As the altitude increases, temperatures drop. The air also grows thinner, provoking intense radiation, even on clouded days. During the day the incoming radiation of ultraviolet and infrared light is fierce, while at night the outward radiation under a clear sky has a considerable cooling effect. The equatorial location dictates marked diurnal variations in temperature, whereas the seasonal differences are less important, as if it were summer every day, winter every night.

There is no water shortage in the Rwenzori. Yet several members of the afroalpine family bear resemblance with species that normally thrive in desert climates. The reason lies in their similar water economy. Although abundantly present, water is not always readily available to the afroalpine plants when they need it. The nightly frosts affect the sap transport in the plants, and the intake of water by its roots. As the day begins, the air temperature and radiation level rise rapidly, putting strenuous demands on the exposed parts of the plants. It is vital to meet the transpiration demands of the leaves, and maintain a proper water balance. To counter the effects of freezing, the afroalpine plants have developed the insulation systems which give them such a striking appearance. As a rule, these adaptive trends become more prominent as the altitude rises.

>
+Flora vs altitude MetersOrder!! 1500 !! 2000 !! 2500 !! 3000 !! 3200 !! 3400 !! 3600 !! 3800 !! 4000 !! 4200 !! 4400 !! 4600 !! 4800 !! 5000 !! 5100 Lamiales
 Mimulopsis elliotii'Mimulopsis arborescens Rosales Prunus africana Hagenia abyssinica 
 Alchemilla subnivalis'Alchemilla stuhlmanii'Alchemilla triphylla'Alchemilla johnstonii 
 Alchemilla argyrophylla Fabales Albizia gummifera Cornales Alangium chinense Malpighiales Casearia battiscombei'Croton macrostachyus'Neoboutonia macrocalyx'Symphonia globulifera Hypericum sp 
 Hypericum revolutum'Hypericum bequaertii Asparagales
 Scadoxus cyrtanthiflorus 
 Disa stairsii Asterales
 Dendrosenecio erici-rosenii 
 Dendrosenecio adnivalis'Helichrysum sp.Lobelia bequaertii'Lobelia wollastonii Helichchrysum guilelmii 
 Helichchrysum stuhlmanii 
 Senecio transmarinus'Senecio mattirolii Apiales
 Peucedanum kerstenii Myrtales Syzygium guineense Sapindales Allophylus abyssinicus Gentianales Tabernaemontana sp. Galium ruwenzoriense Ericales Pouteria adolfi-friedericii Erica arborea'Erica trimera 
 Erica silvatica'Erica johnstonii Brassicales
 Subularia monticola Primulales
 Rapanea rhododendroides Ranunculales
 Ranunculus oreophytus'Arabis alpina Santalales Strombosia scheffleri Poales
 Yushania alpina Carex runssoroensis'Festuca abyssinica 
 Poa ruwenzoriensis Lecanorales
 Usnea OrderMeters!! 1500 !! 2000 !! 2500 !! 3000 !! 3200 !! 3400 !! 3600 !! 3800 !! 4000 !! 4200 !! 4400 !! 4600 !! 4800 !! 5000 !! 5100
Sources: 

Fauna
The range is known for its animal populations, including forest elephants, several primate species, and many endemic birds.

 Glacial recession in Rwenzori 

A subject of concern in recent years has been the impact of climate change on Rwenzori's glaciers. In 1906 the Rwenzori had 43 named glaciers distributed over six mountains with a total area of , about half the total glacier area in Africa. By 2005 less than half of these were still present, on only three mountains, with an area of about . Recent scientific studies, such as those by Dr. Richard Taylor of University College London, have attributed this retreat to global climate change and have investigated the impact of this change on the mountain's vegetation and biodiversity.

