Yunlin County is a county in western Taiwan. It is located east of the Taiwan Strait, west of Nantou County, and is separated from Changhua County by the Zhuoshui River and from Chiayi County by the Beigang River. Yunlin is part of the Chianan Plain, a flat land known for its agriculture. Agricultural products of Yunlin County include pomelo, tea leaves, suan cai, papaya and muskmelon. Yunlin's rivers give it potential for hydroelectricity. Douliu is the largest and capital city of Yunlin. Yunlin is one of the least developed counties on the West coast, and suffers from emigration.

History

Dutch Formosa
During the Dutch Formosa era, Ponkan (modern-day Beigang) was an important coastal castle.

Qing Dynasty
Yunlin County was established during the Qing Dynasty. Liu Mingchuan was in charge of Taiwan, which had been divided into three counties since 1683, Yunlin being part of Zhuluo County. Mountains made transportation and communication between bordering counties (Changhua and Chiayi) difficult, so Liu suggested a new county, called Yunlin, for easier management. In 1887, Yunlin became one of the four counties of the new Taiwan Prefecture.

Empire of Japan
During the Japanese colonial times, Yunlin (Unrin) County was again abolished due to the resistance from the local people and combined with Tainan Prefecture. However, Douliu (as Toroku Town, 斗六街) continued to be an important city of central Taiwan.

Republic of China
The Yunlin area stayed under Tainan County administration after the handover of Taiwan from Japan to the Republic of China on October 25, 1945. On August 16, 1950, Yunlin County was established again by separation from Tainan County, with Douliu Township as the county seat. On December 25, 1981, Douliu Township was upgraded to a county-controlled city.

Geography
Yunlin County is located in the central-south portion of western Taiwan and is at the northern tip of the Chianan Plain. The county is bordered by Nantou County to the east, the Taiwan Strait to the west, Chiayi County to the south separated by the Beigang River, and Changhua County to the north separated by the Zhuoshui River. Its widest distance from east to west is 50 km and from north to south is 38 km, with a total area of 1,290.83 km2. Around 90% of its area are plains; the other 10% are hilly.

Climate
The weather in the county is sub-tropical, with an annual average temperature of 22.6 °C and an average annual rainfall of 1,028.9 mm.

Administration
Yunlin County is divided into 1 city (Douliu), 5 urban townships and 14 rural townships. Douliu City is the county seat and home to the Yunlin County Government and the Yunlin County Council. Lee Chin-yung of the Democratic Progressive Party is the incumbent Magistrate of Yunlin County.
 Name (Hanyu Pinyin) !! Hanzi !! Wade-Giles !! Tongyong Pinyin !! Taiwanese (POJ) !! Hakka Pha̍k-fa-sṳCityDouliu City 斗六市 Tou-liu Douliou Táu-la̍k Téu-liukUrban townshipsBeigang Township 北港鎮 Pei-kang Beigang Pak-káng Pet-kóngDounan Township 斗南鎮 Tou-nan Dounan Táu-lâm Téu-nàmHuwei Township 虎尾鎮 Hu-wei Huwei Hó͘-bóe Fú-mîTuku Township 土庫鎮 T'u-k'u Tuku Thô͘-khò͘ Thú-khùXiluo Township 西螺鎮 Hsi-luo Siluo Sai-lê Sî-lôRural townshipsBaozhong Township 褒忠鄉 Pao-chung Baojhong Po-tiong Pô-chûngCitong Township 莿桐鄉 Tz'u-t'ong Cihtong Chhì-tông Tshṳ̀-thùngDapi Township 大埤鄉 Ta-p'i Dapi Tōa-pi Thai-phîDongshi Township 東勢鄉 Tung-shih Dongshih Tang-sì Tûng-sṳErlun Township 二崙鄉 Erh-lun Erlun Jī-lūn Ngi-lûnGukeng Township 古坑鄉 Ku-k'eng Gukeng Kó͘-kheⁿ Kú-hângKouhu Township 口湖鄉 K'ou-hu Kouhu Kháu-ô͘ Khiéu-fùLinnei Township 林內鄉 Lin-nei Linnei Nâ-lāi Lìm-nuiLunbei Township 崙背鄉 Lun-pei Lunbei Lūn-pòe Lûn-poiMailiao Township 麥寮鄉 Mai-liao Mailiao Be̍h-liâu Ma̍k-liàuShuilin Township 水林鄉 Shui-lin Shueilun Chúi-nâ Súi-lìmSihu Township 四湖鄉 Ssu-hu Sihhu Sì-ô͘ Si-fùTaixi Township 臺西鄉 T'ai-hsi Taisi Tâi-se Thòi-sîYuanchang Township 元長鄉 Yuan-ch'ang Yuanchang Goân-chiáng Ngièn-tshòng

Demographics and Culture
Cultural activities in the county is regulated by the Bureau of Cultural Affairs of the Yunlin County Government, which holds exhibitions, speeches, performances and studies to promote the arts and related activities.

Sports
The county government promotes many sports. The Douliu Baseball Stadium and Yunlin County Stadium are two of the international-level sports facilities in the county.

The first for-all-people games were held in Yunlin County in 2000. The county also hosted the 2005 National Games. In the 2011 National Games at Changhua, Yunlin ranked 11th out of the 22 counties and cities of Taiwan, with 10 gold, 8 silver and 8 bronze medals.

Economy

Yunlin County's economy relies mainly on agricultural production, including fresh-water fisheries, although there are also industrial parks.

Agriculture
Farmlands accounts for around 68% of Yunlin County's area. Good weather and fertile lands allows various seasonal crops. Among the agricultural products are coffee, hard clams, horseshoe calms, Taiwan tilapia, shaddock, soy sauce, pickled cabbage, peanuts and sesame oil.

Fishery
Yunlin County boasts excellent fishing grounds along its coastline. There are several leading fishing ports, at Boziliao, Santiaolun, Taixi, Taizicun, and Jinhu. Several institutions were established in the county to help the development of the county's fishing industries: the Taixi Experimental Fishing Grounds, the Seawater Fish Farming Research Center, the Aquaculture Experimental Station, and the Agriculture Council.

Livestock
Livestock farming includes pigs, cows, chickens, geese and ducks. The county government has been aggressively helping the dairy farmers to upgrade their feeding techniques, and also set up modern meat-packing facilities.

Tourism
The county government plans to develop the tourism and recreational industries within the county, such as by establishing a holiday fish market at the Boziliao Fishing Port in the hopes of attracting more visitors.

Education

The county is home to four universities: the China Medical University Beigang Campus, the National Formosa University, the National Yunlin University of Science and Technology and the TransWorld University. There are 8 public senior high schools, 9 private high schools, 32 junior high schools and 156 elementary schools, as well as the National Yunlin Special Education School.

To promote life-long learning, the Yunlin County Government established a community university in 2001 with 6 learning centers to offer county residents more opportunities.

Energy

Power generations
Yunlin County houses one power plant, the Mailiao Power Plant, in Mailiao Township. Commissioned in July 1999, it has a capacity of 4,200 MW and is the third largest coal-fired power plant in Taiwan.

Tourist attractions

Historical buildings
Historical buildings in the county include the Jhen Wen Academy and Xiluo Theater.

Tourist towns
Caoling is the main tourist town in Yunlin County.

Temples
Temples in the county include the Chaotian Temple, Xiluo Guangfu Temple and Yongan Temple.

Museums
Yunlin County is home to several museums, such as the Honey Museum, Soy Sauce Brewing Museum, Yunlin Hand Puppet Museum and Yunlin Story House.

Festivals
Festivals, such as the Beigang International Music Festival, are regularly held in the county.

Theme parks
The Janfusun Fancyworld is a theme park in the county.

Nature
Yunlin County houses the Erlun Sports Park.

Transportation

Rail
The Taiwan Railway Administration serves Yunlin at Linnei, Shiliu, Douliu, Dounan and Shigui.

The Taiwan High Speed Rail Yunlin Station is expected to be completed in 2015.

Roads
The National Highway No. 1 and No. 3 pass through Yunlin County. Famous bridges in the county are the Xiluo Bridge, connecting the county to the neighboring Changhua County, and the Beigang Tourist Bridge, connecting the county to the neighboring Chiayi County.

Air
Yunlin County does not have any airport. The nearest airport is the Chiayi Airport located in neighboring Chiayi County.

Relative location


