XHDTV-TDT, virtual channel 49 (UHF digital channel 47), is a MyNetworkTV-affiliated television station serving the Tijuana–San Diego international metropolitan area that is licensed to Tecate, Baja California, Mexico. The station is owned by Mexican-based Televisora Alco (which also owns the station's transmitter) and operated by the Entravision Communications Corporation; XHDTV is a sister station to Univision affiliate KBNT-CD (channel 17), UniMás affiliate KDTF-LD (channel 51) and Telemundo affiliate XHAS-TDT (channel 33). All four stations share studio facilities located on Ruffin Road in the Kearny Mesa section of San Diego, California, United States; XHDTV maintains transmitter facilities located southwest of Palm Valley, Baja California.

The station's branding, XDTV MyTV 13, is derived as both a shortened form of the officially-licensed XHDTV callsign and from the station's cable channel position on cable providers in the market; the station is also carried in Tijuana on Cablemás channel 172.

As it is licensed by the Mexican government, XHDTV is not covered under the Federal Communications Commission's must carry rules. This means that XHDTV is the only full-power MyNetworkTV affiliate that local cable providers are not required to carry, even if the station requests to be carried under this provision. XHDTV-TDT is currently the only English-language commercial television station in the San Diego–Tijuana market that does not air locally produced newscasts, either produced by the station itself or through one of the six news departments operated amongst the other full-power commercial English stations in the area.

History
The station first signed on the air on November 1, 1999 as XHUPN-TV. Operated as an English-language commercial station since its debut (the second such Baja California-licensed station in the San Diego–Tijuana market to operate in this manner, after XETV-TV (channel 6)), it originally served as the market's UPN affiliate, which brought that network's programming back to the market just over a year after charter affiliate KUSI-TV (channel 51) dropped UPN due to the network's low viewership locally and reverted to being an independent station in 1998. In the interim, UPN programming was brought in out-of-market from KCOP-TV, the network's owned-and-operated station in Los Angeles, on San Diego area cable providers. When XHUPN went on the air, the station asked those cable providers to drop KCOP from their lineups. Thereafter, XHUPN adopted the "UPN 13" moniker; while XHUPN was the station's official call letters as licensed by the Federal Commission of Telecommunications, it used the fictional and abbreviated callsign "XUPN" on-air.

On January 24, 2006, Time Warner and CBS Corporation announced that they would shut down The WB and UPN. The two networks would then have some of their programming folded into a single service, The CW. On that same date, The CW signed KSWB-TV (channel 69) as the network's San Diego charter affiliate as part of a ten-year affiliation agreement between the network and KSWB owner Tribune Broadcasting's 14 WB-affiliated stations at the time. After the merger was announced, XHUPN was expected to become an affiliate of Spanish-language network Telefutura; however on March 18, 2006, it was announced that XHUPN would instead become a charter affiliate of MyNetworkTV, another upstart network created by the Fox Entertainment Group subsidiary of News Corporation (the Telefutura affiliation instead went to KDTF-LP (channel 51)).

The station dropped all UPN references on-air soon afterward and simply called itself "Channel 13" and later "TV 13" (this same practice of stations dropping UPN branding following the announcement of The CW's launch had become common on UPN affiliates owned by News Corporation's Fox Television Stations unit). Not long after XHUPN received the MyNetworkTV affiliation, the station changed its callsign to XHDTV-TV. UPN programming on XHDTV ended on September 4, with the exception of WWE SmackDown, which aired on late Friday evenings/early Saturday mornings after 12:00 a.m. for two weeks prior to The CW's launch.

Digital television
Digital channels
The station's digital signal is multiplexed: Channel Video Aspect PSIP Short Name Programming 49.1 1080i 16:9 XHDTV Main XHDTV-TDT programming / MyNetworkTV 49.2 480i 4:3 MUNDO F MundoFox

XHDTV-TV became a charter affiliate of MundoFox, which launched on August 13, 2012 on digital subchannel 49.2.

Analog-to-digital transition
In the summer of 2011, XHDTV-TV began transmitting a digital signal on UHF channel 47, this signal remaps on ATSC digital tuners in both countries as virtual channel 49.1 (reflecting its analog channel allocation) through PSIP. While the United States completed its transition to full-power digital television on June 12, 2009, Mexico is making the transition to digital-only television broadcasts over the course of several years in order from the largest population centers to the smallest; the country's digital television transition expected to be completed by December 31, 2015. XHDTV-TV was required to shut down its analog signal on April 16, 2013, as all television stations in the Tijuana metropolitan area were required to switch to digital-exclusive broadcasts on that date. 

Programming
In addition to carrying MyNetworkTV programming, syndicated programs broadcast by XHDTV-TV include Judge Mathis, Glee, How I Met Your Mother, Dish Nation, Who Wants to Be a Millionaire, The King of Queens and Friends.

