Seawise Giant, later Happy Giant, Jahre Viking, Knock Nevis, Oppama, and finally Mont, was a ULCC supertanker and the longest ship ever built. She possessed the greatest deadweight tonnage ever recorded. Fully laden, her displacement was , the heaviest ship of any kind, and with a draft of , she was incapable of navigating the English Channel, the Suez Canal or the Panama Canal. Overall, she was generally considered the largest ship ever built. She was sunk during the Iran–Iraq War, but was later salvaged and restored to service. She was last used as a floating storage and offloading unit (FSO) moored off the coast of Qatar in the Persian Gulf at the Al Shaheen Oil Field.

The vessel was sold to Indian ship breakers, and renamed Mont for her final journey in December 2009. After clearing Indian customs, she was sailed to, and intentionally beached at, Alang, Gujarat, India, to be broken.

History
Seawise Giant was ordered in 1974 and delivered in 1979 by Sumitomo Heavy Industries, Ltd. at their Oppama shipyard in Yokosuka, Kanagawa, Japan as a 418,000 ton ULCC. The vessel remained unnamed for a long time, and was identified by its hull number, 1016. During sea trials, 1016 exhibited massive vibration problems while going astern. The Greek owner refused to take delivery and the vessel was subject to a lengthy arbitration proceeding. Following settlement the vessel was sold and christened Oppama by S.H.I.File:Bateaux comparaison2 with Allure.svg|thumb|300px|left|Size comparison of some of the longest ships. From top to bottom: Knock Nevis (ex-Seawise Giant), Maersk Mc-Kinney Møller, Vale Brasil, Allure of the Seas, and .

The shipyard exercised its right to sell the vessel and a deal was brokered with Hong Kong Orient Overseas Container Line founder C. Y. Tung to lengthen the ship by several metres and add 156,000 metric tons of cargo capacity through jumboisation. Two years later she was relaunched as Seawise Giant.

After the refit, the ship had a capacity of , a length overall of and a draft of . She had 46 tanks, of deck space, and drew too much water to pass through the English Channel. The rudder weighed 230 tons, the propeller 50 tons.

Seawise Giant was damaged and sunk during the 1980–1988 Iran–Iraq War by an Iraqi Air Force attack while anchored off Larak Island on 14 May 1988 and carrying Iranian crude oil. The ship was struck by Parachute retarded Bombs. Fires ignited aboard the ship and blazed out of control, and she sank in the shallow waters off the coast of Larak Island, Iran. She was declared a total loss and was laid up.

Shortly after the Iran-Iraq war ended, Norman International bought the wreckage of the ship and raised her and repaired her. She was renamed Happy Giant after the repairs. These repairs were done at the Keppel Company shipyard in Singapore after towing her from the Persian Gulf. She entered service in October 1991 as Happy Giant.

Jørgen Jahre bought the tanker in 1991 for US$39 million and renamed her Jahre Viking. From 1991 to 2004, she was owned by Loki Stream AS and flew the Norwegian flag.

In 2004, she was purchased by First Olsen Tankers Pte. Ltd., renamed Knock Nevis, and converted into a permanently moored storage tanker in the Qatar Al Shaheen oil field in the Persian Gulf.

Size comparison of Knock Nevis, ex-Seawise Giant (in red) and other ships and buildings:








Knock Nevis was renamed Mont, and reflagged to Sierra Leone by new owners Amber Development Corporation, for her final voyage to India in January 2010 where she was scrapped by Priyablue Industries Pvt. Ltd. The vessel was beached on December 22, 2009. Her 36 tonne anchor was saved and sent to the Hong Kong Maritime Museum for exhibition.

Size record
Seawise Giant was the longest ship ever constructed, longer than the height of many of the world's tallest buildings. Though slightly smaller than Taipei 101 at , she was larger than the Petronas Twin Towers at . In December 2013, Seawise Giant lost the title of longest ship with the launch of the Prelude FLNG, which measures .

Despite her great length, Seawise Giant was not the largest ship by gross tonnage, ranking fifth at 260,941 GT, behind the four 274,838 to 275,276 GT Batillus-class supertankers. She is the longest and largest by deadweight: 564,763 metric tons. Batillus-class ships and Seawise Giant were the largest self-propelled objects ever constructed.

Seawise Giant was featured on the BBC series Jeremy Clarkson's Extreme Machines while she was underway as Jahre Viking. According to her captain, S. K. Mohan, she could reach up to in good weather, it took to stop from that speed, and her turning circle in clear weather was about .

