Brenda Marjorie Hale, Baroness Hale of Richmond, DBE, QC, PC, FBA (Hon) (born 31 January 1945) is a British legal academic, barrister, judge, and Deputy President of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom.

In 2004, she joined the House of Lords as a Lord of Appeal in Ordinary. She is the only woman ever to have been appointed to this position. She served as a Law Lord until 2009 when she, along with the other Law Lords, transferred to the new Supreme Court. She remains the most senior female judge in the history of the United Kingdom. In February 2013 she was assessed as the 4th most powerful woman in the United Kingdom by Woman's Hour on BBC Radio 4.

Early life
Hale was born in Yorkshire in 1945, one of three daughters. Both of her parents became headteachers. She was educated in Richmond at the Richmond High School for Girls (now part of Richmond School) and later studied at Girton College, Cambridge, where she read Law and graduated with a starred first and top of her class. After becoming assistant lecturer in Law at the University of Manchester, she was called to the Bar by Gray's Inn in 1969, topping the list in the bar finals for that year.

Working part-time as a barrister, Hale spent eighteen years mostly in academia, finally becoming Professor of Law at Manchester in 1986. Two years earlier, she had achieved the distinction of becoming the first woman and youngest person ever to be appointed to the Law Commission, overseeing a number of important reforms in family law during her nine years with the Commission. In 1989, she was made a Queen's Counsel.

Judicial career
Hale was appointed a Recorder (a part-time circuit judge) in 1989, and in 1994 became a judge in the Family Division of the High Court of Justice. Upon her appointment, as is convention, she was appointed a Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (DBE). In 1999, Hale followed Dame Elizabeth Butler-Sloss to become only the second woman to be appointed to the Court of Appeal, entering the Privy Council at the same time.

On 12 January 2004, she was appointed the first female Lord of Appeal in Ordinary and was created a life peer as Baroness Hale of Richmond, of Easby in the County of North Yorkshire, under the Appellate Jurisdiction Act 1876.

In June 2013 she was appointed Deputy President of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom to succeed Lord Hope of Craighead.

Personal life
In 1968, Hale married Anthony Hoggett, a fellow law lecturer at Manchester, with whom she had one daughter. The marriage was dissolved in 1992, in which year she married Julian Farrand, former Professor of Law at Manchester, Pensions Ombudsman and colleague of Hale's on the Law Commission.

Other
Hale is Chancellor of the University of Bristol and Visitor of Girton College, Cambridge, to which positions she was appointed in 2004. She is a member of the Athenaeum Club, London.
Lady Hale was awarded an honorary doctorate from the University of Salford. Salford law school building is also named after her. In 2008, Lady Hale was awarded an Honorary doctorate LLD from the University of Reading. A picture of her receiving her LLD is on display in Foxhill House.

In 2011 Lady Hale was awarded an Honorary doctorate LL.D. www.gla.ac.uk/news/archiveofnews/2011/june/headline_201100_en.html from the University of Glasgow.

In 2013, she was named as the fourth most powerful woman in the UK in the BBC Radio 4 Woman's Hour 100 Power List

