Lougheed Town Centre Station (sometimes abbreviated as Lougheed Station) is a station on the Millennium Line, part of the SkyTrain rapid transit system in Metro Vancouver, British Columbia.

Location

The station is located on Lougheed Highway in an elevated structure across Austin Road in Burnaby, and is directly adjacent to Lougheed Town Centre, a mid-size shopping mall, from where it takes its name. A large Korean neighbourhood, referred to colloquially as Korea Town, exists in the area surrounding North Road south of Lougheed Highway. Outside the eastern exit of the station, near the passenger waiting area, are the Standing Stones of Lougheed.

Services

The station is served by a bus loop with routes including the 97 B-Line, which connects it to Coquitlam Central Station. This and other bus connections to north Burnaby, Port Moody, and Coquitlam area make Lougheed Station a major transportation hub for the area and one of the busiest stations on the Millennium Line.

Due to the shortage of storage tracks at operation and maintenance centre, some trains are stored overnight on tracks near Lougheed station. As a result, the station also serves as the starting point for some early morning and terminus for some late-night trains to/from VCC–Clark and Waterfront stations.

Future connections include the Highway 1 Rapid Bus from Walnut Grove when the new Port Mann Bridge opens, and the Evergreen Line connecting VCC–Clark and Lafarge Lake–Douglas Station in Coquitlam (which will replace the 97 B-Line). Evergreen Line is scheduled to begin service in summer 2016.

Evergreen Line extension

An unbuilt third platform had been roughed in on the east side of the station during its construction, in anticipation of a future connection for a SkyTrain extension to the Coquitlam. The provincial government subsequently postponed the extension in the early 2000s, and in the interim TransLink decided to use light rail technology for the alignment instead of Bombardier's Advanced Rapid Transit technology (as used on SkyTrain's Expo and Millennium lines), rendering the roughed-in platform and the adjacent switches obsolete. However, the provincial government announced new plans for the line in 2008, including the use of SkyTrain or similar technology, so this third platform will now be used when the line opens. This will allow Evergreen Line trains to run seamlessly between VCC–Clark and Lafarge Lake–Douglas Station.

Construction began in mid-2012; the opening of the Evergreen Line is planned for the summer 2016. At the start of Evergreen Line operation, the Millennium Line route will be shortened and this station will become the eastern terminus of the Millennium Line. The Evergreen Line will serve the VCC–Clark to Lougheed Town Centre portion of the route.

Station information

Station layout T Train Level C Concourse Level Austin Avenue entrance only, walkway access to mall. S Street Level 

Station entrances and connections
Gatineau Place / Bus Loop Entrance is located on the east end of the station, connecting the platform with bus loop at street level with elevators and both up and down escalators. Retail shops are available at this entrance. Bus and HandyDart drop-off areas are located on Gatineau Place, in front of the station plaza. See Lougheed Town Centre Station#Transit exchange for a list of other bus connections.

Austin Avenue Entrance is located on the west end of the station platform. An elevator linking the street, concourse, and platform levels; however, there is no escalator between street and concourse level. Pepsi vending machines are available at concourse level.

*Transit connection is available westbound on Lougheed Highway, near the station entrance:
n
s

Austin Avenue Mall Access connects the Lougheed Town Centre mall to the concouse level of Austin Avenue entrance with a long walkway through mall parking lot. The walkway is mostly weather protected, with the exception of few pedestrian crossings.

Transit exchange


Lougheed Town Centre Station provides an off-street transit exchange in between Gatineau Place and Lougheed Highway. The station is close to the boundary of Burnaby (fare zone 2) and Coquitlam (fare zone 3), and about half of the connecting routes are local services within zone 3. Hence the entire bus loop is being given a common fare zone 2/3. Bus bay assignments is as follows:
 Bay Routes 1 97 B-Line Coquitlam Station 2 152 Coquitlam Station (via Mariner)152 Coquitlam Station (via Chilko) (peak only) 3 151 Coquitlam Station (via Coquitlam Recreation Centre) 4 101 22nd Street Station 5 110 Metrotown Station 6 C9 New Westminster Station 7 136 Brentwood Station 8 157 Coquitlam Recreation Centre 9 156 Braid Station (via Coquitlam Recreation Centre) 10 C24 Port Moody StationN9 Downtown Night BusN9 Coquitlam Station Night Bus

