XCOR Aerospace is an American private rocket engine and spaceflight development company based at the Mojave Spaceport in Mojave, California. XCOR was formed by former members of the Rotary Rocket rocket engine development team in September, 1999. XCOR is headed by Jeff Greason who is the CEO.

History
Founded in Mojave, California in 1999.

In 2001, the XCOR designed and built EZ-Rocket, the first privately built and flown rocket-powered airplane. EX-Rocket made its maiden flight in July 2001, flown by test pilot Dick Rutan.

XCOR announced a move of its development and manufacturing operations to Midland, Texas in July 2012. XCOR considered a number of locations for the move, including Spaceport Colorado, before announcing that they would be moving their company headquarters and R&D activities to Texas, in part due to a significant set of financial incentives offered to XCOR by the Midland Development Corporation (MDC) and the Midland City Council.

Key people
Founders Jeff Greason, Dan DeLong, Aleta Jackson and Doug Jones 
each previously worked at the Rotary Rocket company.
Rick Searfoss, Chief Test Pilot, joined the company in the mid-2000s.
Scaled Composites record-setting test pilot Brian Binnie joined XCOR in 2014 as both a test pilot and engineer.

Projects


Lynx rocketplane
The Lynx is capable of carrying a pilot and a passenger or payload on sub-orbital spaceflights over . Between 20 and 50 test flights of Lynx were planned, along with numerous static engine firings on the ground. A full step-by-step set of taxi tests, runway hops and full-up flights were planned to get the vehicle to a state of operational readiness. Lynx was envisaged to be roughly the size of a small private airplane. It would be capable of flying several times a day making use of reusable, non-toxic engines to help keep the space plane's operating costs low. The Lynx superseded a previous design, the Xerus spaceplane. The Lynx was initially announced on March 26, 2008, with plans for an operational vehicle within two years. That date slipped, first to early 2012, and then to 2015.
The Mark II would fly twelve to eighteen months afterwards depending on how fast the prototype moved through the test program.

, XCOR had presold 175 Lynx flights at each.

Thermoplastic polymer development

XCOR has developed Nonburnite, a cryo-compatible, inherently non-combustible composite material based on a thermoplastic fluoropolymer resin. Low coefficient of thermal expansion and inherent resistance to microcracking make it well suited to cryogenic tank use and also part of vehicle structure. , Nonburnite will be used in the tanks of the Lynx rocketplane.

XCOR/ULA liquid-hydrogen, upper-stage engine development project

In March 2011, United Launch Alliance (ULA) announced they had entered into a joint-development contract with XCOR for a flight-ready, cryogenic LH2/LOX upper-stage rocket engine. Partially as a result of positive results achieved from an earlier (2010) effort to develop a new aluminum alloy engine nozzle using innovative manufacturing techniques, ULA believes the new engine technology will save several hundred pounds of weight from the large engine and will "lead to significantly lower-cost and more-capable commercial and US government space flights."

The "multi-year project’s main objective is to produce a flight-ready LOX/LH2 upper-stage engine in the -thrust class that costs significantly less to produce and is easier to operate and integrate than competing engine technologies" 

"The demonstrations announced on March 22, 2011 are from integrated engine/nozzle test firings with XCOR’s Lynx 5K18 LOX/kerosene engine. The engine/nozzle combination demonstrates the ability of the aluminum nozzle to withstand the high temperatures of rocket-engine exhaust over numerous tests, with no discernable degradation of the material properties of the alloys. The tests validated the design, materials and manufacturing processes used in the nozzle, and laid a foundation for scaling the design to EELV-sized engines."

The length of the development program will depend on "the level of investment as milestones are met in the build-a-little, test-a-little approach favored by XCOR." If investment is minimized, flight engines would not be available, , for five to ten years.

A subscale -thrust LH2/LOX engine has been developed, named the XR-5H25, in order to support the XCOR/ULA engine development program. The first hot fire test of the prototype engine was in November 2013, the test was deemed successful. 
It was also the first demonstrated use of a piston-pump-fed LH2 rocket engine, a new method to design "liquid hydrogen rocket engines that fundamentally breaks current cost, reliability and operational models."

Historical projects
Completed projects have included:
* EZ-Rocket, a Rutan Long-EZ homebuilt aircraft fitted with two 400 lbf (1.8 kN) thrust rocket engines replacing the normal propeller engine. EZ-Rocket has been flown at numerous airshows including the 2005 Oshkosh Airshow. EZ-Rocket was "the first rocket-powered aircraft built and flown by a non-governmental entity." On 3 December 2005, XCOR Aerospace flew its EZ-Rocket from Mojave, California to California City, California, both in Kern County. Test pilot Dick Rutan made the flight, which lasted about 9 minutes and carried US mail from the post office in Mojave to addresses in California City. This was the first time that a manned, rocket-powered aircraft was used to carry U.S. Mail.
* Rocket Racer - The EZ-Rocket program led to a second rocketplane design for the Rocket Racing League. It was built on a Velocity SE airframe and later became known as the Mark-I X-Racer. It was powered by an XCOR regeneratively cooled and pump-fed XR-4K14 rocket engine. This rocket-powered aircraft flew several demonstration flights at the 2008 EAA AirVenture Oshkosh air show. The total thrust for the single-engine Mark-I X-Racer has been variously reported as to , approximately twice that of the EZ-Rocket initial prototype. The engine uses pressure-fed LOX and pump-fed kerosene, a combination that allows the fuel to be stored in the airplane's wing tanks while avoiding potential complications with pumping liquid oxygen. After flight testing of the X-Racer was completed in 2008, XCOR completed seven rocketplane flights in one day.
* Tea cart engine, a 15 lbf (67 N) thrust rocket motor burning nitrous oxide and ethane, mounted on a small industrial cart. The tea cart engine has repeatedly been fired indoors at conferences and demonstrations and had accumulated over 1,837 firings and 9,039 seconds of run time by February 25, 2009.
* LOX/methane rocket engines in testing in 2005.

* Early LOX/methane work led to a NASA contract, jointly with ATK, to develop a engine for potential use as the CEV lunar return engine. On January 16, 2007 XCOR announced the successful test firing of a preliminary "workhorse" version of this engine.

