Nina Badrić is a Croatian pop singer. Before starting her career in the entertainment industry she used to be a bank teller. She began performing in early 1990s, exploiting the sudden popularity of dance music, but her repertoire gradually became more mainstream. She's also very popular in Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Slovenia and Turkey.

She competed in "Dora" - Croatian selection for Eurovision Song Contest 4 times. She won 7th place in 1993 with "Ostavljam te", 10th place in 1994 with "Godine nestvarne", 18th place in 1995 with "Odlaziš zauvijek", and almost won in 2003 with "Čarobno jutro", being a runner-up to Claudia Beni with "Više nisam tvoja". Nina starred in popular Croatian television show Mjenjačnica, where she swapped for a day with a zoo animal guard.

Badrić represented Croatia in the Eurovision Song Contest 2012 in Baku, Azerbaijan with the song "Nebo". It finished 12th in the second semi-final and failed to qualify for the grand final.

 Early life 
Nina was born on July 4, 1972 in Zagreb. She attended primary school "Otokar Keršovani", which later in 1995 changed its name to Dr. Ivan Merz. She started singing in the children's choir Zvjezdice at the age of nine. With Zvjezdice she has traveled almost the entire world, recorded several albums and gained a lot of musical experience in choral and gospel singing. After seven years spent in the choir, Nina goes to the studio where she started singing back vocals with performers such as the Parni valjak, Prljavo kazalište and others.

 Start of the success 
While she was humming along with the radio in a boutique where she worked, Dino Dvornik appeared at the door, who was then the great Croatian star. Dino has turned off the radio and told her to sing that song without radio. He was very impressed with what he heard and immediately the next day visited several record companies in Zagreb with Nina.
Later, she had her first major appearance on 'Crovizija', where she won with the song "Ostavljam te", in collaboration with Rajko Dujmić, Jesenko Houra and her first manager Daniel Koletić. Shortly after that she signed her first professional contract with Croatia Records and in 1995 released her first album Godine nestvarne. However, Nina made first major success in duet with singer Emilija Kokić and the song Ja sam vlak.
Badrić released her second album Personality in 1997, the record label Top Zoe Music. Nina won two Porins for best female vocal performance and best album of pop and classical music. She has also finished the song "I'm So Excited" by American R&B group The Pointer Sisters, which brings her international recognition.
Then in 1999 she released the album Unique, which has the 13 compositions, of which two appear in two versions, Woman in Love and also in the remix and Po dobru ti me pamti in vocal and instrumental. On the set was attended by numerous Croatian musicians, Boytronic, Ilan Kabiljo, Ante Pecotić, Zeljko Banić, Peggy, Davor Devčić, Igor Geržina, Mario Igrec, and members of the group Divas. Most of the material was recorded in the studio 'Dancing Bear' and 'JM Trooly '.

 Career 
With the single Nek ti bude kao meni, Nina announces its fourth album, Nina, released in 2000, under the label Croatia Records. There are twelve songs on the album and their authors are Darko Juranović (producer of the album), Ivana Husar, Sandra Sagena, Brešković Brothers, Baby Dooks, Miroslav Lesić, Aleksandra Kovač, Sonja Kovač, Predrag Martinjak, Miro Vidović, Nino Mill, Fresh Jay and Nina. With this team on the set, which was carried out in Zagreb studio Morris, participated in a number of other musicians such as; Kresimir Tomec (Cubismo), Daria Hodnik Marinković, Jadranka Krištof, composition 'XL', Zlatan Došlić (Cubismo), Hrvoje Rupčić (Cubismo), Davor Križić (Cubismo), Renata Sabljak, Robert Vrbančić, Kristijan Zorjan, Josip Grah, DJ 279 (London). Album Nina brings and the second single Ako kažeš da me ne voliš, for which she has recorded a video.

In 2003 she published a compilation Collection and studio album Ljubav. Ljubav album contains thirteen tracks. Čarobno jutro (performed at the "Dora") and Za dobre i loše dane were released as singles. The material was recorded in Zagreb studio Morris.

Her major solo concert was held on 14 February 2005 (Valentine's Day) in the Dom sportova in Zagreb. The concert had also a humanitarian character with whom Nina supported the campaign by UNICEF to house abandoned children. Especially for that occasion Nina has prepared her old hits in a new arrangement, which are composed by Ante Gelo and Darko Juranović. The concert was filmed and the same year Badrić published live album on double CD, Ljubav za ljubav - Live, published by the Aquarius Records.
In November 2007, she released her seventh studio album, symbolically named 07. The album was prepared in London.

The album opens with the song "Kralj života mog", which is performed in a duet with Roma diva Ljiljana Petrović-Buttler. The material contains another duet, which Nina performed with Montell Jordan in the song Do not give this to anyone. The album was created over two years, and was attended by many great musicians, and some of them are: Thomas Burić, Dražen Kvočić-Dash, Aleksandra Milutinović, Ljiljana Petrović-Buttler, Montell Jordan and Steve Sidwell.
After publishing the album '07', 2007 Nina signed a contract with the watch company Frédérique Constant.
Badrić appeared in some of the most important international magazines such as Grazia, the New York Times, Harper's Bazaar as well as the most important magazine in the fashion world, American Vogue edited by Anna Wintour.
In addition, Nina's face was found on billboards around the world as well as in all the world's airports.

In November 2011 Nina announced new album, called Nebo. 
She was elected to represent Croatia in the Eurovision Song Contest 2012 in Baku.

Nina, meanwhile, became the face of world-famous jeweler and jewelry factory Frey Wille. 
After the Eurovision Song Contest Nina started big hall tour that circled the largest auditorium in the region and which were filled to capacity including Belgrade Arena, KC Dražen Petrović and some other where there were 18,000 people.

Discography
s
*Godine nestvarne (Croatia, 1995)
*Personality (Zg Zoe Music, 1997)
*Unique (Croatia, 1999)
*Nina (Croatia, 2000)
*Ljubav (Aquarius, 2003)
*07 (Aquarius, 2007)
*NeBo (Aquarius, 2011)

Eurovision 2012
Nina represented Croatia at the Eurovision Song Contest 2012 in Baku, Azerbaijan with the song "Nebo" (Heaven). She performed in the Second Semi-Final. Despite being one of the favorites in the competition, she failed to reach the top ten and final cutoff, at 12th place with 42 points.
Loreen, winner of Eurovision 2012, called her "the best voice at Eurovision 2012", and "Nebo" also received positive critical acclaim from Portugal, Serbia, Slovenia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Macedonia and Spain.

 Filmography + Film Year Title Role Notes 2005 Bitange i princeze Kandidatkinja Croatian TV series 2006 Libertas Singer TV film 2010 Lud, zbunjen, normalan Herself Episode: "Prljavo suđe" 2014 Magacin Kabare Show Shy Episode #1

 Personal life 
Nina has two sisters; Sunčica and Dijana.
She married Bernard Krasnić in 2006, but they divorced in 2012. Badrić is known as supporter of Croatian Democratic Union. She has won about 30 thousand € for singing for that party.
She is a Catholic.

