Teenage Cancer Trust is a cancer care and support charity in the UK that exists to improve the cancer experience of young people aged 13–24. Founded in 1990, the charity's key service is providing specialist teenage units in NHS hospitals. It also trains and funds staff who are teenage cancer specialists. The units are dedicated areas for teenage and young adult patients, who are involved in their concept and creation. Medical facilities on the units are equipped with computers, TVs, state of the art epic PC's – designed to be places where friends and family feel comfortable to visit.

To date, the charity has built 28 units (and counting) in cities including London, Leed, Liverpool, Birmingham, Sheffield, Newcastle, Manchester, Glasgow, Southampton, Edinburgh, Cardiff, Bristol, Cambridge, Cottingham, Leicester, Nottingham and Wirral.

The charity also serves as an advocate for teenage cancer needs, promoting related research and national and international forums. It also provides support services and education related to teenage and young adult cancer.

History
The idea for the charity grew by chance out of the eagerness of a group of women to organise a fashion show to fund a children's intensive care heart unit at Guy's Hospital, London. It was established in 1990.

Administrative
The Teenage Cancer Trust was registered as a charity in the United Kingdom on 29 May 1997, and holds registration number 1062559 (England & Wales) and SC039757 (Scotland). Today the organisation operates from offices in West London, with an annual income of around £6½M a year.

Presidents of the charity are Dr Adrian Leon Whiteson OBE and Myrna Nita Whiteson MBE.
The trustees of the charity are David Hoare (Chairman), Dr John Matlin, Ronnie Harris, Andrew Hughes, Alan Patten, Richard Barry Rosenberg and Paul Spanswich.

The patrons of the charity are Sarah, Duchess of York and Roger Daltrey.

Celebrity involvement
Roger Daltrey and Pete Townshend of rock band The Who have been intimately involved with the annual charity concerts at Royal Albert Hall. Daltrey has endorsed 'The Whodlums', a Who tribute band based in North East England, which regularly raises money for the Trust.

Some of the many artists and celebrities who have lent their support to the cause include Ash, Noel Gallagher, Kasabian, Suede, Stereophonics, Glenn Tipton, McFly, Ronnie Wood, Chris Martin, The Specials, Muse, The Fratellis, Noel Fielding, Russell Brand, Paul Weller, Them Crooked Vultures, Steve Cradock, Duffy, Arctic Monkeys, Bullet for my Valentine, Florence and the Machine, VV Brown, Antony and the Johnsons, Seth Lakeman, Kate Rusby, Fairport Convention, Fightstar, The Blackout, Depeche Mode, Tinie Tempah, Jessie J, Biffy Clyro, Editors, Beady Eye, Mathew Horne, One Direction, James Corden, The Vamps (British band) and Duran Duran.

Other celebrities who have supported the charity are Joe McElderry, Frank Lampard, Holly Willoughby, Gerald Scarfe, Jameela Jamil, Jorgie Porter and Harry Judd.

Corporate supporters
Corporate supporters include The FA, The Body Shop, Text Santa, The Dallaglio Foundation, MandMDirect and many more.

Stephen Sutton
In April 2014, Stephen Sutton, a teenager with terminal cancer, raised the most money Teenage Cancer Trust had ever received from an individual fundraiser. Sutton died on 14 May 2014, but in September 2014 Teenage Cancer Trust announced how his fundraising total of £5million campaign would be spent. It was revealed in the Queen's Birthday Honours in June 2014 that he had been awarded an MBE in recognition of his fundraising and services to Teenage Cancer Trust.

