Hartington is a village in the Derbyshire Peak District, England, lying on the River Dove close to the Staffordshire border. According to the 2001 census, the parish of Hartington Town Quarter, which also includes Pilsbury, had a population of 345. Formerly known for cheese-making and the mining of ironstone, limestone and lead, the village is now popular with tourists.

Architecture
Notable buildings in the village include: the market hall (formerly the site of a market); the 13th-century parish church of Saint Giles; and 17th-century Hartington Hall. A prominent house in the centre of the village (featured in the photo 'Hartington', below right), is Bank House built by the former village mill owner and in the past used as the village bank. A half-mile (800 m) to the south of the village, on the Dove, is the fishing house of the famous angler Charles Cotton. In the north of the village is Pilsbury Castle, an 11th-century motte-and-bailey castle, that survives only as an earthwork.

Near Hartington is the finest neolithic stone circle in the Peak District, Arbor Low. There are numerous ancient tumuli and cairns in the landscape around Hartington, probably dating from the Bronze Age.

Hartington Mill, now a private house, stands by the River Dove. This was the local water mill for grinding corn.

Attractions
The village has a youth hostel at Hartington Hall, which serves two major National Cycle Network routes; the Tissington Trail and the High Peak Trail, which meet at nearby Parsley Hay. These trails pass just under one mile (1500 m) to the east of the village, and offer of off-road cycling and walking along old railway trackbeds through the Peak District National Park. Hartington signal box, on the site of the former Hartington railway station, and nearly two miles (3 km) distant from the village, has been renovated and converted to a Visitor Centre.

A little south of the village, overlooking the Dove, stands Wolfscote Hill , a good viewpoint, now in the care of the National Trust.

Three miles (5 km) to the south-west lies the small settlement of Hulme End, which marks the northern starting point of the Manifold Way, an tarmacked walk- and cycle-route following the route of the former Leek and Manifold Valley Light Railway.

History
According to the English Place-Name Society the name of the village derives from the Old English for either 'Stags' hill' or 'hill connected with Heorta'. Hartington was mentioned in the Domesday book as belonging to Henry de Ferrers and being worth forty shillings. The parish was originally quite large, and part of the hundred of Wirksworth. Hartington had four townships, known as the Town Quarter, Nether Quarter, and Middle Quarter, and Upper Quarter, which are now all separate parishes. These became separate civil parishes in their own right in 1866. They are marked on Ordnance Survey maps. 
Surnames that originate from this area include Heathcote.

Cheese
The former creamery in the village, often called the cheese factory, was founded by the Duke of Devonshire in the 1870s; it was one of the three sources of Stilton, and also produced its own unique Dovedale cheese and others such as Buxton Blue cheese. The factory was closed in 2009 after being sold by Dairy Crest to the Long Clawson Dairy Company. The cheese shop associated with the factory has re-opened under private ownership.

Notable residents
*Marie Litton, English actress and theatre manager, was born here in 1847
*James F. Redfern, sculptor, was born here in 1838
*Steve Sutton, former Nottingham Forest F.C. goalkeeper, was born here in 1961

