Narail is a district in south-western Bangladesh. It is a part of Khulna Division.

History
Narail town was named after a feudal lord (Zamindars). The zaminders established a market at Roopgonj, named after a zaminder. They established a post office for the first time in the district during British Raj near Rotongonj, named after another member of the feudal lord family. They modernised Narail. They promoted culture, sports and education in that part of the world.

The large playing field "Kuriddobe" was a gift of the feudal lord family. They introduced football competition in that part with a shield given to the champions and a cup the runners-up as well as medals to all players from early twentieth century.
One of the feudal lords moved away from Narail and settled in Hatbaria and established another large manor (jomidarbaari).

Geography
Narail District has an area of . It is located to the south of Magura District, north of Khulna District, with the Faridpur District and Gopalganj District on the east, and Jessore District to the west. Its average temperature ranges between 11.2C and 37.1C and has a yearly presperation of 1467 mm. Through the district flow the Madhumati, Nabaganga, Bhairab, and Chitra rivers. There are many beels and baors, most noted of which is Chachuri Beel.

Total Land Area 
Cultivable Area ,
Fallow Land ,
Area Under Forest 10 Acre,
Area Irrigated ,
Area Under River 

Religion

The district of Narail consists 1675 mosques, 248 temples, four churches, seven tombs and 11 shrines.
Out of them the "Radha Raman Smriti Tirtha Mandir" founded by ″Shri Tribhanga Brahmachary″ (Babaji of Shri Shri Bhagvat Sevashram Sangh)at Debbhog is a prominent place to visit. Nishinath Tola in Rupganj and Lakkhipasha Thakurbari are prominent places.

Administration
Narail District was established in 1984. It is divided into three upazilas: Narail Sadar Upazila, 
Kalia Upazila and Lohagara Upazila. The upazilas are divided into Narail Sadar and Kalia municipalities and 37 union parishads. These are subdivided into 18 wards, 43 mahallas, 445 mouzas, and 651 villages.

Points of interest
Laxmipasha adarasha para
Motth at Borodia of Nishinathtola. The homestead of famous detective writer Dr. Nihar Ranjan Gupta is at Itna, Lohagora.

Narail Victoria College and Collegiate School is one of the oldest modern high schools in Bangladesh, established in 1858 by the Landlords of Narail who were enthusiastics of education. They also established a girls' school which was a rarity in Bangladesh at that time. It's called Shib Shankar Memorial Girls' School. This school closed down due to lack of funding after they left East Pakistan for India. It was reopened by some local enthusiasts, like Mr. J Bhattacharjee, Mr. S Biswas and Mr. B Bhowmic. They borrowed furnishings from the neighbours. They went house to houses soliciting parents to send their children to the school.

Narail Palace was one of the biggest Landlord mansions in Bengal. When the Hindu landlords left East Pakistan for Kolkata after partition of India, the mansion was looted and vandalised and gradually collapsed. There is still some remains present specially the Kaalibaari (temple of goddess Kali), Shibmondir (temple of Lord Shiva) and the Bandha ghaat on the River Chitra. Some local people continued the famous Durga Puja in the mansion, but was discontinued after a few years. Part of the building was used for some time as government office. But due to lack of maintenance it gave in. Also Kalia Palace was one of the biggest Landlord mansions in Bengal. Some Landlords lived in Naragati. Naragati was a thana in the British period. The predecessor of Robi Sankar & Uday Sankar lived in Kalia.

The famous writer Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay was a magistrate in Narail and his book Neelkuthi was based on the forceful cultivation of indigo in Narail by the East India Company.
Narail was once declared independent from the British Raj by Ms Shorola di (Sister Shorola), as she was known at the time by her followers of the independence movement of India. But the independence lasted for 3 days only.

Dighalia sahapara every year arrange maha nam jagga . Many people come here to see this occesion. In this place sarawsati puja is arranged by saha para friends club and ever green puja ujjapon committee.

Transport
The town of Narail is the road transport hub of the district. To the west it is connected by regional highway R750 to Jessore, about 32 km away. R720 runs north 50 km to Magura. Within the district, zilla road Z7503 runs east to Lohagara and on to the Kalna ferry ghat on the Madhumati River. Z7502 runs south, across the Nabaganga River at Baroipara Ghat by ferry, and on to Kalia.

Media
Print media:
*Prothom Alo (National)
*The Daily Kaler kantho (National)
*The Daily Samakal (National)

Telecommunications:
*Airtel, BTCL, Bangla Link, Teletalk, Grameen Phone, Robi etc.

Satellite Television:
*Dish TV, TATA Sky.

Notable residents
* Mashrafe Bin Mortoza, cricketer and former captain of the Bangladesh national cricket team
* Suvra Mukherjee, First Lady of India , wife of President of India Pranab Mukherjee
* Bijoy Sarkar, poet, baul singer, lyricist, and composer
* SM Sultan, artist

