Northwood University (NU) is a private university in the United States with campuses in Midland, Michigan (opened in 1961), Cedar Hill, Texas (opened in 1966) and West Palm Beach, Florida (opened in 1984). Also, the university has four international joint programs, including one with Hotel Institute Montreux in Montreux, Switzerland, began in 2001. More than 33,000 persons have graduated from the institution.

History
Northwood University opened as Northwood Institute in 1959 by Arthur E. Turner and R. Gary Stauffer. One hundred students enrolled at the new school, which was initially located in a 19th-century mansion in Alma, Michigan. Northwood Institute moved to Midland, Michigan, in 1961.

The Jesuits operated a seminary known as West Baden College at the former West Baden Springs Hotel, in Orange County, Indiana, from 1934 until June 1964, when declining enrollment forced the closure of the facility. They sold the property to a Michigan couple, who in turn donated it to Northwood Institute, which operated a satellite campus of their business management school under the great dome on the property from 1966 until 1983, when it was closed. During the same time frame during which the Indiana campus was opened, a Northwood facility was also established in Texas, which continues to serve students in the Southwest United States.

In 1982, David E. Fry became president of the school. The Florida residential campus was added and the academic curricula was expanded. The school was accreditied by the Higher Learning Commission and is a member of North Central Association of Colleges and Schools.

In 1993, the name was changed from Northwood Institute to Northwood University and The DeVos Graduate School of Management was created. A joint program with the Hotel Institute Montreux was established in 2001 to combine Swiss hospitality traditions with American management practices. The school, located in Montreux, Switzerland was Northwood University's first international venture. University College program centers were expanded for a total of 40 locations in eight states and program centers were begun in Bahrain, Malaysia, People's Republic of China, Sri Lanka, and Switzerland.

In October 2007, Keith A. Pretty was named Northwood's third President and CEO.

On February 27, 2014, Northwood announced that it would close its residential operations at the Texas location, while continuing to expand its adult degree program there.

Undergraduate programs

Traditional programs
Northwood grants the Bachelor of Business Administration degree with majors in: Accounting, Advertising & Marketing, Aftermarket Management, Automotive Marketing & Management, Computer Information Management, Economics, Entertainment Sport & Promotion Management, Entrepreneurship, Finance, Fashion Marketing & Management, Hospitality Management, International Business, Management, Marketing, Management Information Systems, and Operations & Supply Chain Management.

DeVos Graduate School of Management
The school provides a Master of Business Administration degree and utilizes case study methodology to learn management by practicing management.

Athletics

Michigan campus Timberwolves
The teams of the Northwood University's Michigan campus are known as the Timberwolves. The campus is a member of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) Division II level; primarily competing in the Great Lakes Intercollegiate Athletic Conference (GLIAC). Men's sports include baseball, basketball, cross country, football, golf, ice hockey, soccer, tennis and track & field; while women's sports include basketball, cross country, golf, soccer, softball, tennis, track & field and volleyball.

Men's ice hockey
Northwood University men's ice hockey competes in the American Collegiate Hockey Association (ACHA) and is a member of the Michigan Collegiate Hockey Conference (MCHC).

Florida Campus Seahawks
The teams at the Florida campus of Northwood University are known as the Seahawks. The campus is a member of the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics (NAIA), competing in The Sun Conference (formerly known as the Florida Sun Conference). Men's sports include baseball, basketball, golf, soccer and tennis; while women's sports include basketball, golf, soccer, softball, tennis and volleyball.

The 2013 women's soccer team won the Florida Sun Conference championship and advanced to the NAIA National Championship in Orange Beach, Alabama. The Seahawks lost in the semifinals on penalties, but made history as the most successful women's soccer team ever at Northwood University.

The men's soccer team reached the quarterfinals at the NAIA National Tournament, and were the most successful sports team at Northwood during the 2006-07 academic year.

The men's basketball team is coached by Rollie Massimino, who is best known for leading Villanova to the 1985 NCAA national title. In their first year of competition they reached the national tournament but lost in the first round for the 2006-07 season. In 2014 the team won the Sun Conference Tourney and attended the NAIA National Tournament in Branson for the eighth straight year. In their second year of competition they reached the elite eight of the national tournament before losing. They play at the Countess de Hoernle Student Life Center.

The women's basketball team has won 2 consecutive conference championship titles (2006–07, 2007–08) under former head coach John Thurston. In the 2007-08 season the Lady Seahawks made an appearance at nationals held in Sioux City, Iowa. The Lady Seahawks lost in the first round against Bethel College who was the #1 seed.

Texas Campus Knights
Until May 2014, the Northwood University Texas campus operated athletic teams known as the Knights. The campus was a member of the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics (NAIA), competing in the Red River Athletic Conference (RRAC). Men's sports included baseball, basketball, cross country, golf, soccer and track & field; while women's sports included basketball, cross country, golf, soccer, softball and track & field. In July 2013 the Northwood Knights joined the Sooner Athletic Conference (SAC) for all sports before dropping sports altogether in May 2014.

Notable alumni
*Candice Miller, Member of the U.S. House of Representatives
*Rob Childress, college baseball coach
*Dick DeVos, 2006 Michigan GOP gubernatorial candidate, son of Amway co-founder
*Chris Wilson, Washington Redskins defensive end
*Jerry Pettway, American Basketball Association, Houston Mavericks guard
*Jose Jono Jumamoy, Municipal Mayor of Inabanga, Bohol, Philippines
*Robert Height, 2007 Continental Indoor Football League MVP
*Carole Gist, Miss USA 1990.

