Xilinhot is a county-level city which serves as the seat of government for the Xilin Gol league in Inner Mongolia, People's Republic of China. It has a jurisdiction area of , and a population of 245,886, with 149,000 being in the Xilinhot urban area.

History
During the Ming Dynasty in these places were nomadic child in the 17th knee Belguteya, elder brother of Genghis Khan, so the local Mongols were called "abganar" (translated from Mongolian "Abgal" means "paternal uncle"). When in the first half of the 17th century the Mongols submitted to the Manchu. abganar territory were divided into two banners: Abganar-Tszoitsi (abganar left wing) and Abganar-Yuitsi (abganar right wing), commanded by "wings" in the rank of princes "beile". Besides abganarov, also lived here and tribes Abgal {阿巴嘎} and Hotsit (浩齐特). Xinlihot was renamed Beizi Temple (bèi zǐ miào 贝子庙), since Emperor Qianlong built a Lama temple which was called Beizi Temple here in 1743. Nowadays, the temple is one of the largest temples on the Xilin Gol grassland. In 1953, the county was renamed Xilinhot while in 1956 it was renamed Abahanaer Banner. In 1983, it was approved to set up as a county-level city by the state council, and finally renamed Xilinhot.

Geography
The elevation is about . The city is from Beijing and Hohhot, the capital of Inner Mongolia, respectively.

Climate
Xilinhot experiences a cold semi-arid climate (Köppen BSk) with long, very dry, and bitter winters and short, hot summers. The monthly 24-hour average temperature ranges from in January to in July, with an annual mean of . With monthly percent possible sunshine ranging from 59% in July to 73% in February, sunshine is abundant year-round, the city receives 2,970 hours of sunshine per year; due to the aridity, the diurnal temperature variation frequently approaches and exceeds . A majority of the of annual rainfall occurs in July and August alone.



Cityscape


Economy
Xilinhot is a market of significance, where cattle is of particular importance.

Culture and Tourism

The historic centre includes an artistic temple. The Naadam Festival, a Mongolian feast, is celebrated here every year. Naadam is a gathering of the Mongolian people for wrestling, horse trading, costume contests, horse racing, etc. It's their summer festival and is generally very colorful with costumes and colorful yurts set up to serve food and sell trinkets and supplies.

Mongolian culture is very prominent with pictures, tapestries and monumental statues of Genghis Khan in every home, shop and street corner.

Tourists can stay at nearby yurt resorts where there is a large yurt for dining surrounded by smaller individual yurts for sleeping. The surrounding countryside is rolling grasslands populated by Mongolians who have horses, sheep, goats and some cows. Meals consisted of mutton, beef, cabbages, and other fruit and vegetables.

Cuisine
Xilinhot's diet is of more emphasis on the processing of local dairy and meat production. Dairy products include horse milk yogurt, milk, tofu, milk skin as the representative, along with the beef and mutton string, hand meat, grilled lamb as the representative of the cattle and mutton.

 Transportation 
The city has an airport that has regular flights to Beijing from Air China and daily flights to Hohhot from Shandong Airlines. The K7917 train connects Xilinhot with Baotou and departs daily. 
*China National Highway 207

External links
*
*www.morphotoart.com/china/china_index.html

