Lisselton is a village in County Kerry, Ireland. It is located 8 km northwest of Listowel on the R553 road to Ballybunion. The village is part of the Parish of Ballydonoghue, which is located in the centre of North Kerry.

The village contains three pubs (Cantillons, Tomaisins and The Thatch Bar), a church, a supermarket/post office and a butchers. There are about 50 houses in the village itself and a large number of new private businesses have started in the locality over the past five years. There are two primary schools in The Parish.

Leisure and sport
Ballyloughran Leisure Centre was operated by Limerick Youth Service but has since closed down. It contained a gym, pool, sauna, steamroom and jaccuzzi.

A number of sporting organisations also exist in the parish, with Ballydonoghue GAA Club and Lisselton Rovers F.C. being the two foremost. Lisselton Rovers, one of the most successful sides in the Kerry District League, was based in Lisselton until 2012, when they relocated to Ballybunion and renamed themselves LB Rovers.

The GAA club have their own grounds at Coolard and they host a weekly GAA lottery draw, which is held every Friday night in rotation in the three local pubs.

www.ballydonoghuegaa.com/ Ballydonoghue GAA
The parish has been represented on the county team on a number of occasions, providing three of the 1947 team that played in the only All Ireland final ever hosted outside of the country, the Kerry-Cavan duel played in The Polo Grounds in New York.

Lisselton Grotto
This was built in 1954, the Marian Year, and was recently refurbished as part of the work carried out by members of the local FAS scheme.

Transport
The famous Lartigue monorail passed through Lisselton from 1888 until 1924. The village now has a taxi service and a bus service.

Education
Lisselton National School opened in 1983. The School has approximately 134 students, five class teachers, a learning support teacher, a resource teacher and two special needs assistants. Coolard National School is the second school. Dromerin National School was the third, but it was unfortunately closed in September 2012 due to dwindling numbers. It is known for producing local legends.

Literary Endeavour

Lisselton was the birthplace of Maurice Walsh, whose most famous work was The Quiet Man. John B Keane’s people were also from the area and he once remarked that it was a throbbing vein of literary genius running through the locality that made it easier to write than not to write.

ballydonoghuemagazine.com/ The Ballydonoghue Parish Magazine was established in the eighties and each annual edition has over fifty articles covering a wide range of issues of local relevance, including Gaelic Games and which are represented locally by www.ballydonoghuegaa.com/ Ballydonoghue GAA.

ballythefireside.blogspot.ie/ Ballythefireside represents the literary works of local poet Brendan Hegarty.

Gisèle Scanlon of The Goddess Guide is an author, illustrator and photographer of diverse worldly fashion and beauty adventures.

Eamie Kissane would have been generally described as a natural genius and a small sample of his art is featured in ballydonoghuemagazine.com/videos The Ballydonoghue Parish Magazine. A peerless character who was equally gifted of brush and tongue, he was the original source of many a joke that circumnavigates the planet.

