The Overseas Highway is a highway carrying U.S. Route 1 (US 1) through the Florida Keys. Large parts of it were built on the former right-of-way of the Overseas Railroad, the Key West Extension of the Florida East Coast Railway. Completed in 1912, the Overseas Railroad was heavily damaged and partially destroyed in the Labor Day Hurricane of 1935. The Florida East Coast Railway was financially unable to rebuild the destroyed sections, so the roadbed and remaining bridges were sold to the state of Florida for $640,000.

Since the 1950s the Overseas Highway has been refurbished into a main coastal highway between the cities of Miami and Key West, offering travelers an exotic roadway through a tropical savanna environment and access to the largest area of coral reefs on the USA mainland. Many exotic animals such as the American Crocodile and Key Deer inhabit the tropical islands of the Florida Keys.

History
While the Overseas Highway today runs along the former Overseas Railway right of way, portions of it did exist in a different alignment while the railroad was still operational. Designated as State Road 4A, the original roadway was completed in 1928 and existed in two sections. One section in the upper keys ran from the mainland via the Card Sound Bridge to Lower Matecumbe Key, while section in the lower keys ran from No Name Key to Key West. An automobile ferry service connected the 41 mile gap between the two sections, as well as Marathon. In the Upper Keys, State Road 4A closely followed the Overseas Railway. Through Key Largo today, the northbound lanes run along the route of the original highway, while the southbound lanes run along the route of the railroad. In the Lower Keys, State Road 4A followed a much different path than the Overseas Railway starting with the Ferry landing on eastern end of No Name Key. From the ferry landing, State Road 4A followed what is now Watson Road on Big Pine Key which crossed to Little Torch Key where it rejoined the Overseas Railway from Middle Torch Key, Ramrod Key, Summerland Key and Cudjoe before splitting off to the southern shoreline of Sugarloaf Key. On Sugarloaf Key, State Road 4A passed by the many of the notable resorts of the day such as the Pirate's Cove before crossing to Geiger Key. On Geiger Key, it continued along what is now Geiger Road to the current Boca Chica Road and Boca Chica Key. On Boca Chica Key, State Road 4A followed the shoreline south of Naval Air Station Key West's airstrip to Boca Chica Beach where it crossed to Stock Island. On Stock Island, it followed Maloney Avenue and McDonald Avenue where it rejoined the Overseas Railway heading into Key West. Most of the State Road 4A bridges in the Lower Keys were of wooden construction and had been in use by the early 1920s.

By the early 1930s it was clear that the ferries were insufficient for the travel needs of the keys, and Monroe County began making plans to connect the two portions of State Road 4A to make a continuous highway. In 1933, the state legislature created the Overseas Road and Toll Bridge District to seek federal funding. Funding eventually came through the Federal Emergency Relief Administration which was created as part of President Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal. A group of World War I veterans seeking early payment of financial bonuses for their service in the war were employed for construction.

Construction to extend the upper keys portion of the highway to Grassy Key was already underway at Lower Matecumbe Key when the Labor Day Hurricane of 1935 struck the area (the hurricane that destroyed the railroad). Many of the veterans did not survive the hurricane, and construction was suspended on the project. Just west of Lower Matecumbe Key at Mile Marker 73 on the current highway, eight concrete bridge piers and a small dredged island that were to support the original bridge alignment remain to this day and are visible from the current highway. The piers remain as a memorial to the veterans killed in the hurricane and the dredged island is now known as Veteran's Key.

The Florida East Coast Railway was financially unable to rebuild the railroad, so the state acquired the railroad right of way, and the highway was then built on the former railroad route between Lower Matecumbe Key and Little Torch Key. The construction used many of the bridges of the former railroad, including truss bridges, where the roadway was built on top of the trusses. The retrofitting of the railroad bridges for automobile use was accomplished by Cleary Brothers Construction Co. of West Palm Beach. The full highway from the mainland to Key West was opened on March 29, 1938.

During World War II, the United States Navy sought improvements to the Overseas Highway to improve their access from the Naval Air Station Key West on Boca Chica Key to the mainland. This resulted in the rest of the original lower keys portion of the highway being rerouted onto the former railroad right of way as it was a more direct route, as well as the construction of the current alignment of the highway from Florida City to Key Largo via Jewfish Creek (known as the 18-Mile Stretch) in 1945. The new alignments shortened the route to the mainland by 17 miles. The original Card Sound Bridge was closed after the realignment, and was subsequently destroyed by a fire (The Card Sound route was restored in 1969 with the opening of the current bridge).

After the realignment in 1945 to its current entry onto Key Largo along the old railroad right-of-way, The Overseas Highway received the unsigned designation State Road 5, the same as the entirety of US 1 south of Jacksonville at that time. 
Portions of the road were tolled until April 15, 1954; toll booths were located on Big Pine Key and Lower Matecumbe Key. Pigeon Key, roughly the midway point of the Seven Mile Bridge, served as the headquarters for the "Overseas Road and Toll District." The toll for automobiles was $1, plus 25 cents per passenger.

One of animated television's Wacky Races was The Overseas Hi-Way Race, which first aired on December 28, 1968, on CBS, covering the entire actual route from Key Largo to Key West. While Long Key was correctly portrayed, most of the other in-between keys were given fictional names, and Sombrero Key was actually five miles south of the highway in open water, according to the Florida Keys–East map.

The entire roadway of the Overseas Highway was substantially rebuilt in the 1980s. Most of the older bridges built for railroads were replaced by more modern bridges that are able to accommodate more than two lanes of traffic. This included the Seven Mile Bridge, the Bahia Honda Bridge and the Long Key Bridge (although these three original bridges are no longer open to vehicular traffic, except for part of Seven Mile Bridge, they are listed on the National Register of Historic Places and are currently used as fishing piers). In recent years, Pigeon Key was used by the University of Miami as an oceanography laboratory, but current efforts to restore the buildings on the island have resulted in the establishment of a railroad museum there. The newer Seven Mile Bridge does not have direct access to Pigeon Key; people going there must walk on of the original Seven Mile Bridge from its northern end on Knight's Key, or take a shuttle bus, to reach the island.

Mile markers
Locations along the Overseas Highway from Key West to Key Largo are commonly given as mile markers. The Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT) maintains mile marker signs every mile along the highway. Numbering starts in Key West, and increases towards the east and northeast up the path of the highway over the keys. Businesses along the highway began listing their locations by mile markers, adding decimal parts to more precisely indicate locations between mile marker signs. Outside of Key West and the city of Marathon, street addresses along the highway are based on the mile markers, using a four- to six-digit number (with no decimal point); the numbering pattern is as follows:
*The first three (or four) digits denote the approximate mile marker
*The last two digits denote a particular address; an even digit denotes an address on the Atlantic Ocean side while an odd digit denotes an address on the Florida Bay/Gulf of Mexico side

As an example, the Tropical Research Laboratory of Mote Marine Laboratory has a physical address of 24244 Overseas Highway. The first three digits indicate that it is near mile marker 24.2 (it is located on Summerland Key) while the last two digits indicate that it is located on the Atlantic Ocean side of the highway.

Trail
In 2001, the Monroe County Commission, the Florida Department of Environmental Protection's Office of Greenways and Trails, and FDOT entered into a Memorandum of understanding to create the Florida Keys Overseas Heritage Trail (FKOHT). The trail will be a world-class, multi-use bicycle and pedestrian facility that will traverse the Florida Keys from Key Largo to Key West. Upon completion, the FKOHT will include an integrated system of educational kiosks, roadside picnic areas, scenic overlooks, fishing piers, water access points, and bicycle and jogging paths. The development of the trail will provide a mechanism for the preservation and use of the historic Flagler Railroad Bridges, 23 of which still exist and are mostly intact. Several alternatives exist for trail alignment, including cutting down the , 1940s-era roadway to its original spandrel width, or using the roadway as is, particularly in multi-use areas. In all cases, original bridgework will be repaired or rebuilt, and the breaks created during the 1980s and 1990s fishing pier conversion will be reconnected. Where the original roadway no longer exists, the trail will be temporarily cantilevered on the side of the current US 1 highway bridge, until new trail bridge sections can be built. The new sections will be built to match the historical character of the original bridges.

Major intersections


























































































