Xavier Becerra is an American politician and a member of the United States House of Representatives for , representing Downtown Los Angeles in Congress since 1993. Becerra, a member of the Democratic Party, is currently Chairman of the House Democratic Caucus.

Born in Sacramento, California, Becerra is a graduate of Stanford University, receiving his J.D. from Stanford Law School. He worked as a Lawyer at the Legal Assistance Corporation of Central Massachusetts, before returning to California in 1986 to work as an Administrative Assistant for State Senator Art Torres. He served as Deputy Attorney General in the California Department of Justice from 1987 to 1990 before he was elected to the California State Assembly, where he served one term from 1990 to 1992.

Becerra was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives in 1992, previously representing California's 34th congressional district from 1993 to 2003 and California's 31st congressional district from 2003 to 2013. During his tenure in the House, he has served as Chairman of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus from 1997 to 1999, Vice Chairman of the House Democratic Caucus from 2009 to 2013, and was a member of the Joint Select Committee on Deficit Reduction.

Early life, education and law career
Born in Sacramento, California, Becerra is the son of working-class immigrants who immigrated from Jalisco, Mexico. As a young child Becerra grew up in a one room house with his three sisters. He graduated in 1976 from C.K. McClatchy High School located in central city Sacramento. He attended University of Salamanca in Salamanca, Spain from 1978 to 1979, before earning his B.A. in Economics from Stanford University in 1980, becoming the first person in his family to graduate from college. He received his Juris Doctor from Stanford Law School in 1984 and was admitted to the State Bar of California in 1985. He was initially a lawyer, working on cases involving individuals with mental impairment for the Legal Assistance Corporation of Central Massachusetts.

Early political career

Becerra worked as an Administrative Assistant for California State Senator Art Torres in 1986. He served the Deputy Attorney-General in the California Department of Justice under Attorney General John Van de Kamp from 1987 to 1990.

After incumbent State Representative Charles Calderon decided to seek a seat in the California Senate, Becerra launched a grassroots campaign for the California State Assembly, defeating Calderon's Senate aide Marta Maestas in the Democratic primary. He later went on to beat Republican Lee Lieberg and Libertarian, receiving 60% of the vote. Becerra served one-term in the State Assembly representing California's 59th district from 1990 to 1992.

U.S. House of Representatives

Elections
2
In 1992, 25th District Congressman Edward Roybal announced his retirement after 30 years in Congress. Becerra entered the race for the seat, which had been renumbered as the 30th District after redistricting.

He won the Democratic primary with a plurality of 32% of the vote. In the general election, he defeated Republican nominee Morry Waksberg 58%–24%.

0
In 1994, he won re-election to a second term with 66%, the lowest re-election winning percentage of his career. After, he never won re-election with less than 72%. His district was renumbered as the 31st District after the 2000 census.

2

After redistricting, most of Becerra's old district became the 34th District. Becerra announced he would run there; it includes his home. He defeated Republican Stephen Smith 85.6% to 14.4%.

Tenure
Becerra is a prominent member of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus, of which he served as chairman during the 105th Congress. He was featured on The Colbert Report's Better Know a District on August 17, 2006.

On September 29, 2008 Becerra voted against the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 because he "wanted to see direct protections for responsible homeowners" in the bill.

Becerra considered running for Democratic Caucus Vice Chair for the 110th Congress; however, he deferred to John Larson when DCCC chairman Rahm Emanuel decided to run for Caucus Chair, the position Larson had been running for. Instead, Becerra was appointed assistant to the Speaker of the House for the 110th Congress.

Before the opening of the 111th Congress, Emanuel accepted a position as White House Chief of Staff in the Obama Administration. Larson succeeded Emanuel as caucus chair, and Becerra won his bid to succeed Larson as Vice-Chair. He defeated Marcy Kaptur of Ohio by a vote of 175–67.

In 2011, Becerra successfully ran for a second-term as Vice-Chair to serve during the 112th Congress.

During the 111th Congress and 112th Congress, Becerra served on several high profile committees. On March 24, 2010 Becerra was appointed to serve on the National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform (often called Bowles-Simpson/Simpson-Bowles). On August 11, 2011 Becerra was selected to serve on the Joint Select Committee on Deficit Reduction (also known as the Super Committee). And on December 23, 2011 Becerra was appointed to serve on a bicameral conference committee to find bipartisan solutions on the middle class tax cuts, unemployment insurance, and the Medicare physician payment rate.

Taxes
Becerra has consistently expressed opposition to Social Security and Medicare cuts and tax provisions seen to benefit outsourcers. Becerra argued against Job Protection Act and Recession Prevention Act of 2012 which would extend certain tax provisions enacted in 2001 and 2003 under G.W. Bush, on which Becerra voted against despite it passing through the House. Mr.Becerra has consistently voted against budget plans like that would protects tax cuts for higher income brackets by cutting Medicare, Medicaid, SNAP, and vital federal services. He supported legislation like the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012.

Immigration
As a Representative from California, immigration is a pertinent issue for Rep. Becerra because of its proximity to the border and the large number of undocumented immigrants in California. Rep. Becerra is a strong advocate for immigration reform and is a strong supporter of the DREAM Act and comprehensive immigration reform. Additionally, Rep. Becerra supports the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program put in place by President Obama.

Women's Issues
Becerra is pro-choice and supports the right of access to abortion. On May 31, 2012, Becerra voted against H.R. 3541, the Prenatal Nondiscrimination Act (PRENDA) that would impose civil and criminal penalties on anyone who knowingly attempts to perform a sex-selective abortion. The bill also requires healthcare providers to report known or suspected violations to law enforcement, including suspicions about a woman's motives for seeking an abortion. Becerra received a 100% rating from Planned Parenthood and NARAL Pro-Choice America in 2012. Becerra voted in favor of the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009 which would make the 180-daystatute of limitationsfor filing an equal-pay lawsuit regarding pay discrimination reset with each new paycheck affected by that discriminatory action.

Committee assignments
*Committee on Ways and Means
**Subcommittee on Oversight
**Subcommittee on Health
**Subcommittee on Social Security
*Joint Select Committee on Deficit Reduction

Caucus memberships
*Congressional Hispanic Caucus (Former Chair)
*Congressional Asian Pacific American Caucus

Party leadership
Becerra considered running for Democratic Caucus Vice Chair for the 110th Congress; however, he deferred to John Larson when DCCC chairman Rahm Emanuel decided to run for Caucus Chair, the position Larson had been running for. Instead, Becerra was appointed assistant to the Speaker of the House for the 110th Congress.

Before the opening of the 111th Congress, Emanuel accepted a position as White House Chief of Staff in the Obama Administration. Larson succeeded Emanuel as caucus chair, and Becerra won his bid to succeed Larson as Vice-Chair. He defeated Marcy Kaptur of Ohio by a vote of 175–67.

In 2011, Becerra successfully ran for a second-term as Vice-Chair to serve during the 112th Congress. During the 111th Congress and 112th Congress, Becerra served on several high profile committees. On March 24, 2010 Becerra was appointed to serve on the National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform (often called Bowles-Simpson/Simpson-Bowles). On August 11, 2011 Becerra was selected to serve on the Joint Select Committee on Deficit Reduction (also known as the Super Committee). And on December 23, 2011 Becerra was appointed to serve on a bicameral conference committee to find bipartisan solutions on the middle class tax cuts, unemployment insurance, and the Medicare physician payment rate.

Other political ambitions

2001 run for L.A. Mayor
Becerra ran for mayor of Los Angeles in 2001. He finished with 6 percent of the primary vote, finishing behind businessman Steve Soboroff, Councilman Joel Wachs, former California State Assembly Speaker Antonio Villaraigosa, and the eventual winner, then-City Attorney James Hahn.

Obama administration
On January 27, 2008, Becerra formally endorsed U.S. Senator Barack Obama for President.

Becerra was considered for the position of US Trade Representative in the administration of President-elect Obama. While it was initially reported that he had already accepted, on December 15, 2008, he announced that he would not accept the position.

Personal life
Becerra is married to physician Carolina Reyes and has three children. He owns a home in Chevy Chase, Maryland where he, his wife and three children reside.

