Toshiro Misawa, also known as Fuji, is a comic book superhero in the Stormwatch series, first appearing in Stormwatch #1. He has immense size and strength as well as the ability to control the density of his body granted by his containment suit. However, he is unable to control his molecular structure without it and he would revert into a radioactive cloud of plasma, possibly dying in the process without some other form of containment.

 Fictional biography 
The nickname Fuji was given to him in high school, because of his extraordinary size and Japanese origin. He spent some time as a Sumo wrestler in his teens but developed a strange condition which caused his body's structure to deteriorate. His father, Yoshi Misawa, was a wealthy businessman and invested a lot of that money into curing his son but was told it was incurable. Stormwatch then stepped in to help. However, when his powers were fully activated, Fuji's body reverted to plasma and only quick thinking by Stormwatch scientists saved his life. Now, he is unable to live outside his specially built containment suit, a fact which affects him emotionally though he often hides it behind a cheerful exterior.

Life in the suit, however, had its advantages. When asked in one issue if there were any good things about having to live that way, he replied that the suit gave him an orgasm every five minutes.

 Stormwatch 
Fuji's containment suit has changed many times over the course of his Stormwatch duties. Despite inherent problems, such as his fingers being too big to operate communication devices, Fuji still enjoys bragging about how beautiful he considers himself to be.

Fuji once assisted the Wildcats, where rogue team-member Tao caused him severe mental damage by trapping him in a mental loop. It took some time to recover from this.

Fuji's deep patriotism is highlighted in Stormwatch #42 as he breaks protocol to personally confront a Japanese madman who is causing widespread death in Tokyo and beyond with the intention of having other countries taking over Japan. After an ideological confront, the madman died in the hands of his own genetically engineered soldiers. Fuji never spoke about that day again.

During downtime in Clark's Bar, a hangout for superpowered people, Fuji tells of a secret unique to his physical makeup. The random vibrations of every day life build up inside the gas of his body. Every five minutes, they 'erupt', giving him an orgasm. His teammates are duly shocked and/or envious.

 Death 
Fuji was killed when his containment suit was destroyed during an attack by Xenomorphs on Skywatch in the WildC.A.T.s/Aliens crossover, along with Fahrenheit, Hellstrike, and others.

 Rebirth 
When The Authority's Doctor resurrected Winter, his teammates were resurrected as well, including Fuji. According to Fahrenheit's memories, one of The Monitors seemingly played a role in this, specifying that they would be needed. Later in the Stormwatch: Post Human Division issue of Wildstorm: Armageddon however, it is suggested that they were saved by a possible future version of Jackson King. Fuji has rejoined the reorganized Stormwatch Prime. Fuji is seen playing a support role in the Post Human Division comic book series.

He will reappear during World's End, in a new Stormwatch: Post Human Division team.

DC Universe
After the events of Flashpoint, the Wildstorm universe is merged with that of the DC Universe. Fuji eventually reappears as one of the teen metahumans who has been forced to work for the N.O.W.H.E.R.E. organization. He is shown watching the battle between Superboy and Rose Wilson, and tries to intervene, but is stopped by his handlers.

 Powers and abilities 
Superhuman strength, sufficient to hurt The High. Radioactivity controlled and regulated by his cybernetic suit.

