Panda Energy International, Inc. is an American privately held company headquartered in Dallas, Texas which constructs, maintains and operates environmentally friendly power plants. The organization has been recognised by Newsweek magazine as one of the top ten eco-friendly energy companies in America. The company's name is a reference to the endangered Giant Panda. As of 2010, it has been affiliated with Panda Power Funds.

History
Panda Energy, headquartered in Farmers Branch, Texas (but lists "Dallas" on its site due to a fluke with its ZIP Code) was founded in 1982 and has developed, financed, constructed and operated large-scale energy facilities both domestically and internationally. The company built the two largest gas-fueled merchant electric generation facilities in the United States totaling 4,400 megawatts of generating capacity; was responsible for the first U.S sponsored, internationally financed run-of-the-river hydroelectric project in the state of Nepal; and obtained the first U.S. capital markets financing for construction of a power plant in The People’s Republic of China. Altogether, the company has raised over U.S. $5 billion to develop and build more than 9,000 megawatts of generating capacity. 

The Carter family have owned a controlling stake in the company ever since, making Panda Energy a family business.
Robert W. Carter has been the Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer of Panda Energy International Inc. (Panda International), holding Company of Panda Interfunding Corp. and Panda Funding Corp. since January 1995 and serves as President. Mr. Carter serves as Manager of Panda Rosemary, LLC. He serves as the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Panda Global Energy Company. He has held similar Chief Executive positions with Panda Energy Corporation ('PEC'), a subsidiary of Panda International and its subsidiaries since he founded PEC in 1982. Mr. Carter also is President of Robert Carter Oil & Gas, Inc. (an oil and Gas exploration company), which he founded in 1980. From 1978 to 1980, Mr. Carter was Vice President of oil and gas lease sales for Reserve Energy Corporation (an oil and gas exploration company). From 1974 to 1978, he served as a marketing consultant to Forward Products, Inc. (a petrochemical company). Mr. Carter was Executive Vice President of Blasco Industries (a Chemical and Textile Manufacturer) from 1970 to 1974. He served as a sales representative and Sales Manager for Olin Mathieson Chemical Corporation (a petrochemical, pulp and paper company) from 1965 to 1970. From 1960 to 1965, he was a sales representative for Inland, Mead Paper Company in Atlanta. He has been the Chairman and Director of Panda Ethanol Inc. since November 6, 2006. Mr. Carter serves as Director of Panda Energy International Inc. Mr. Carter attended the University of Georgia.

TNA Entertainment, LLC.

In October 2002, Panda Energy purchased a controlling interest (72%) of the Nashville, Tennessee-based professional wrestling promotion Total Nonstop Action Wrestling from founder and CEO Jerry Jarrett. The seemingly unlikely acquisition came about after TNA publicist Dixie Carter, the daughter of Robert W. Carter, contacted her father and persuaded him to purchase the company (which was facing bankruptcy after a major financial backer, HealthSouth Corporation, withdrew their support).

On October 31, 2002, Panda Energy created the limited liability company TNA Entertainment in order to administer TNA. While Jeff Jarrett, the former President of TNA, was appointed Vice President, the majority of other management positions were filled by former Panda executives. Chris Sobol, the Panda Manager of Business Development, was appointed Vice President of Operations, and Frank Dickerson (and later Kevin Day) was appointed chief executive officer, while Dixie Carter was made President.

