Qidong is a county-level city under the administration of the prefecture-level city of Nantong in southeastern Jiangsu province, China. It is located on the north side of the Yangtze River opposite Shanghai and forms a peninsula jutting out into the East China Sea. It has a population of 1.12 million.

The center of the city is named Huilong Township. It also has a well-known fishing port called Lüsi town, named after Lü Dongbin, one of the eight immortals, who is said to have visited the place four times. Qidong's Qilong township was formerly a separate island in the Yangtze called Yonglongsha but now forms a pene-enclave on Chongming Island, most of which belongs to Shanghai.

 History 
The area of present-day Qidong was part of the East China Sea until the Han dynasty, when deposition from the Yangtze River began to form islands, notably including Dongbuzhou at the site of present-day Lüsi. These developed until they became fully merged with the mainland during the Qing dynasty. Under the Republic, was established in March of 1928. By November of 1989, it was considered urban enough to be labelled a county-level city instead.

In July 2012, Qidong was the scene of a violent environmental protest against an industrial waste pipeline.

 Language 
People living in Lüsi town speak a different dialect—known as the Lüsi or Tongdong dialect —from most other residents, who generally speak Qidong Dialect . The two dialects are considerably different and thus they are not mutually intelligible. Because most economic, educational and governmental activities are held in the city capital Huilong, where Qidong Dialect is prevalent, many residents of Lüsi have learned to understand and even speak the majority dialect.

Qidong Dialect is a dialect of Wu Chinese. Some people consider it similar to Shanghainese, also a dialect of Wu Chinese. It is almost the same as the dialect spoken in Chongming, which is under the administration of Shanghai.

Both of the two dialects belong to the Northern Wu. However, because of cultural differences among two places, there still exist non-intelligible usage mostly in vocabulary.

 Education 
High schools in Qidong include Qidong High School, Huilong High School, Dongnan High School, among others.

 Infrastructure 
The 200-300 mile Ningqi Highway connects Nanjing to Qidong.

The Chongqi Bridge over the Yangtze River, completed in 2011 links Qidong with Chongming County and also the urban centre of Shanghai, reducing the driving time from three hours to one hour. Qidong can be reached from Shanghai Pudong Airport within 45 minutes without traffic congestion. The bridge is the Yangtze River crossing closest to the river mouth.

Economy
Local industry focuses on pharmaceutical production, computer accessory production and chemical fertilizer production.

Qidong is an offshore engineering & construction hub hosting companies like COSCO, SINOPACIFIC, Specialty Process Equipment Corporation (SPEC), Shanghai Zhen Hua Heavy Industries (ZPMC) Qidong Marine Engineering Company Limited (formerly DAODA Heavy Industry) and several other heavy industry, shipyard & fabrications facilities.

Major agriculture crops produced in the area include wheat, corn, soy beans, peanuts, yams and cotton. The climate is suitable for pears, peaches, oranges and watermelons.

Fishing is a major source of income for some rural residents.

 Weather 
There are four distinct seasons: spring, summer, fall, and a mild winter. During the summer, monsoon lasts for weeks, and there is plenty of rain.

