Diocese of Guildford is a Church of England diocese covering nine of the eleven districts in Surrey, much of north-east Hampshire and a parish in Greater London. The cathedral is Guildford Cathedral and the bishop is the Bishop of Guildford. Of the two provinces of the church it falls within the Province of Canterbury.

History
The diocese was formed on 1 May 1927 from part of the Diocese of Winchester.

Organisation
Of the eleven secular districts of Surrey, nine fall within the diocese however Spelthorne is part of the Diocese of London and Tandridge District is contained in the Diocese of Southwark. 

A secular district of Hampshire and a small part of a second fall within the diocese: these are Rushmoor and Hart District respectively. Fleet, Church Crookham, Cove, Minley, Blackwater and Ewshot are the main settled parishes in Hart district not in the Diocese of Winchester, part of Rowledge is also in that district rather than Surrey. Chessington falls within the diocese in Greater London.

Bishops
The diocesan Bishop of Guildford (Andrew Watson) is assisted by Ian Brackley, Bishop suffragan of Dorking. The suffragan see of Dorking was re-created in 1968, having briefly existed in the Diocese of Winchester from 1905 to 1909. The diocese usually operates an informal area scheme in which the diocesan bishop mostly oversees Surrey archdeaconry and the suffragan Dorking, dividing the episcopal workload between the western and eastern parts of the diocese respectively, and each to work with an archdeacon as well as the administrative staff. Alternative episcopal oversight (for parishes in the diocese which reject the ministry of priests who are women) is provided by the provincial episcopal visitor, Norman Banks, Bishop suffragan of Richborough, who is licensed as an honorary assistant bishop of the diocese in order to facilitate his work there.

There are also two former bishops living in the diocese who are licensed as honorary assistant bishops:
*2006–present: Michael Baughen, retired Bishop of Chester, lives in Godalming.
*2009–present: Christopher Herbert, retired diocesan Bishop of St Albans, lives in Wrecclesham and is also licensed in Winchester and Chichester dioceses.
Archdeaconries
*Archdeaconry of Surrey (established 12th century) – Archdeacon of Surrey: the Ven Stuart Beake; generally overseen by the diocesan Bishop of Guildford
**includes Deaneries of Aldershot, Cranleigh, Farnham, Godalming, Guildford and Surrey Heath
*Archdeaconry of Dorking (established 1928) – Archdeacon of Dorking: the Ven Paul Bryer; generally overseen by the Bishop suffragan of Dorking
**includes Deaneries of Dorking, Emly, Epsom, Leatherhead, Runnymede, Woking

Publications and work
The Wey
The six-issue magazine is entitled The Wey and summarises charitable and parish news undertaken by the church connected with the Diocese and its members.

Charitable work
Around 90 Church schools are financially linked to the Diocese of Guildford, including two Secondary schools. 

The Bishop of Guildford's Foundation supports faith-linked projects and groups that respond to local needs and help build stronger communities. It expresses a sense of communal solidarity with people in need and provides a mechanism for wealthier parishes and church members to channel support to needier groups. Grants are made to a wide variety of causes, including charities working with people who have disabilities, family support projects, youth and children's workers, organisations developing employment for vulnerable people, community organisations, projects for the homeless, school healthy breakfast clubs restricted to the most disadvantaged or troubled families, the Guildford Street Angels team, a less mobile elderly group in Box Hill, and play activities and facilities for children in two of the neediest housing estates.

Special ministries
Typically non-parochial ministry in the working hours of local priests, chaplains are appointed to 14 schools, to 10 FE colleges/universities, 23 hospitals and homes, the four prisons, Guildford and Woking town centres, Community of St Peter and Acorn Christian foundation, to the Ambulance Service. The diocese subsidises a BSL qualified Chaplain Among Deaf People. 

