{|





USS Howorth (DD-592) was a Fletcher-class destroyer built for the United States Navy during World War II. She was laid down on 26 November 1941, launched on 10 January 1943, and commissioned on 3 April 1944 at Puget Sound Naval Shipyard in Bremerton, Washington. She was the 161st ship of her class. Howorth was named after William L. Howorth, a US Navy sailor who participated in the sinking of the CSS Albemarle during the Civil War.

World War II service
After a shakedown cruise, Howorth was assigned to Destroyer Squadron 21 (DesRon 21). The flotilla set sail on 22 July 1944, as part of the escort for a convoy carrying Marines to Pearl Harbor. The convoy arrived after seven days at sea, and Howorth remained in Hawaii until 25 August, at which point she sailed for Hollandia, along with the ammunition ship Sangay (AE-10). Howorth was assigned to Destroyer Division 41 (DesDiv 41), of the 7th Fleet. Her first combat experience was in the Solomon Islands on anti-submarine and escort duty.

The Philippines
Howorth arrived off Leyte on 22 October, three days after the initial landings began. She guarded the transport anchorages during the Battle of Leyte Gulf, and did not see direct action during the battle. Howorth made several convoy trips to Kossol Roads, Guam, and Manus, before returning to the Philippines for the battle at Ormoc on 7 December 1944. Howorth also participated in the Battle of Mindoro, during which she was attacked by several kamikazes, one of which slightly damaged Howorths mast before the plane crashed into the sea.

On 9 January 1945, the Invasion of Lingayen Gulf began. Howorth arrived with the first reinforcement group four days later on the 13th, which came under kamikaze attacks while en route. Howorth provided fire support to the invasion forces, provided anti-aircraft support for the invasion fleet, and patrolled the flanks of the fleet.

Iwo Jima
Howorth also took part in the invasion of Iwo Jima, arriving on 19 February. Howorth again provided fire support and anti-aircraft protection during the invasion and subsequent fighting on Iwo Jima. On 14 March, Howorth departed Iwo Jima for a short rest at Ulithi.

Okinawa
Howorth was assigned to screen a convoy from Ulithi bound for Okinawa, arriving on 1 April. After arrival at Okinawa, she again provided fire support and anti-aircraft defense. On her first day off Okinawa, Howorth was moving to her station with the cruiser St. Louis (CL-49) and destroyer (DD-586), when she was attacked by eight kamikazes. One made it through the ships' anti-aircraft fire and struck Howorth in her superstructure, killing nine men and causing a fire that was quickly put out.

Following the damage sustained at Okinawa, Howorth returned to the United States for repairs. She arrived at Mare Island Naval Shipyard in California on 2 May 1945. Repairs were completed by early July, and after a brief shakedown cruise in July, she set sail for Pearl Harbor on 15 July. The ship was en route to Adak, Alaska on 15 August, when the news of the Japanese surrender reached the ship.

Post-war
Howorth arrived in Yokohama, Japan on 17 September, where she escorted convoys back from Japan. Her final trip from Japan was on 11 November, and arrived in San Francisco on the 28th of that month. The ship was decommissioned on 30 April 1946, and was placed in the Pacific Reserve Fleet. She remained in reserve until 1962 when she was sunk off San Diego as a torpedo target. Howorth received five battle stars for her service during World War II.

Gallery
 

External links
*destroyerhistory.org/fletcherclass/usshoworth/ USS Howorth website at destroyerhistory.org/ Destroyer History Foundation
*www.navsource.org/archives/05/592.htm Photos
*www.destroyersonline.com Destroyers Online








