Yeading F.C. were an English football club from Yeading in the London Borough of Hillingdon, West London.

Club history
Their roots trace to a youth club formed in Yeading in 1960. They have been known as Yeading Football Club after 1965. However, they remained in the junior and intermediate ranks until the 1980s when they were at last granted senior status, joining the old London Spartan League in 1984 and the Isthmian League in 1987. In 1990 they won their first national title, the FA Vase, as well as their regional division of the league. The following year they were promoted to the league's Premier Division for the first time but were relegated in 1998.

After the Isthmian League Division One was divided in 2002 they were placed in Division One North. They won the championship of that league in the 2003–04 season, returning to the Premier Division. A strong start to the season was crowned on 5 December 2004 with their being drawn at home to Premiership side Newcastle United in the third round of the FA Cup, after beating Slough Town 3–1. Yeading's average league game attendance of 137 contrasted with Newcastle's nearly 52,000. After some confusion as to whether the game could be played in front of 2,300 at Yeading's ground, The Warren, it was decided to play it on 9 January 2005 at Loftus Road, and the crowd numbered 10,824. A scoreless first half held out hope of an upset but two second-half Newcastle United goals decided the game. Yeading went on to win the Isthmian League championship that season, earning promotion to Conference South.

On 28 October 2006, Yeading were drawn against Nottingham Forest in the FA Cup first round. The game was one of the biggest in their history, going up against former back to back European Champions. Yeading were hoping to upset the East Midlands team, but the task proved too much for The Ding, as they were emphatically beaten 5-0.

On 18 May 2007, Yeading announced that they would be forming a merger with fellow Conference South side Hayes. The new club retained its place in the Conference South, and is now known as Hayes & Yeading United.

Stadium
The club played at The Warren. The ground is located just off Springfield Road in Hayes, Middlesex. When Yeading merged with Hayes, the Warren fell into disuse as Hayes' Church Road became the new club's ground. However, it is still used for youth and reserve team purposes. It is intended that it be redeveloped in the near future, at which point it will commence hosting first team football once more.

Popular culture
The successful 2002 film Bend It Like Beckham was filmed at The Warren, and the training sessions and matches depicted in the film take place there. The film also contains a scene where the girls football team in the film ride in a Yeading F.C. van.

The 2001 re-make of the prison-based film Mean Machine starring Vinnie Jones was also filmed at The Warren and featured the then Yeading F.C. player Nevin Saroya as one of the footballers.

Records
*FA Cup best performance: third round proper – 2004–05
*FA Trophy best performance: third round proper – 2006–07
*FA Vase best performance: winners – 1989–90

Former players
1. Players that have played/managed in the Football League or any foreign equivalent to this level (i.e. fully professional league).
2. Players with full international caps.
3. Players that hold a club record or have captained the club.
* DJ Campbell
* Andy Driscoll

